BASIC CONCEPTS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to-
♦ comprehend the meaning of tax and types of taxes;
♦ discern the difference between direct and indirect taxes;
♦ appreciate the components of income-tax law;
♦ comprehend the procedure for computation of total income for the
purpose of levy of income-tax;
♦ comprehend and appreciate the meaning of the important terms used
in the Income-tax Act, 1961;
♦ comprehend the meaning and scope of agricultural income and apply
the same to identify whether a particular income falls within the scope
of agricultural income;
♦ identify the operations which are partly agricultural and partly non-
agricultural and compute the agricultural income and business income
arising from such operations;
♦ recognise the previous year and assessment year for the purpose of
computing income chargeable to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961;
♦ examine the circumstances when income of the previous year would
be assessed to tax in the previous year itself;
INCOME TAX LAW
♦ apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total
income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of
such person under default tax regime u/s 115BAC;
♦ apply the rates of tax applicable on different components of total
income of a person for the purpose of determining the tax liability of
such person, who exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal
provisions of the Act.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Basic Concepts
Components of Steps for computation Important Basis of charge
Income-tax Law of Total Income (TI) Definitions & rates of tax
and tax liability
Charge of
Income-tax Assessee
Act, 1961 Determination of Income-tax
residential status
Rates of
Annual Finance Assessment
Income-tax
Act Classification of income
under different heads
Income-tax Person
Rules
Computation of income
under each head
Circulars and Income
Notifications
Clubbing of income of
spouse, minor child etc.
India
Legal decisions
Set off or carry forward
& set off of losses
Assessment
Year
Computation of Gross
Total Income (GTI)
Previous Year
Deductions from GTI
Agricultural
income
Computation of TI
Computation of tax
liability
INCOME TAX LAW
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 What is the meaning of tax?
Let us begin by understanding the meaning of tax.
Article 366(28) of the Constitution of India defines the term “Taxation” as follows –
“Taxation includes the imposition of any tax or impost, whether general or local or
special, and tax shall be construed accordingly."
Taxes are considered to be the “cost of living in a society”. Taxes are levied by the
Governments to meet the common welfare expenditure of the society. There are
two types of taxes - direct taxes and indirect taxes.
Direct Taxes: If tax is levied directly on the income or wealth of a person, then, it
is a direct tax. The person who pays the tax to the Government cannot recover it
from somebody else i.e. the burden of a direct tax cannot be shifted. E.g., Income-
tax.
Indirect Taxes: If tax is levied on the price of a good or service, then it is an indirect
tax e.g. Goods and Services Tax (GST) or Custom Duty. In the case of indirect taxes,
the person paying the tax passes on the incidence to another person.
TYPE OF TAXES
DIRECT TAXES INDIRECT TAXES
TAX ON UNDISCLOSED
GOODS AND
INCOME TAX FOREIGN INCOME AND CUSTOMS DUTY
SERVICES TAX (GST)
ASSETS
1.2 Why are taxes levied?
The reason for levy of taxes is that they constitute the basic source of revenue to
the Government. Revenue so raised is utilized for meeting the expenses of
Government like defence, provision of education, health-care, infrastructure
facilities like roads, dams etc.
1.3 Power to levy taxes
The Constitution of India, in Article 265 lays down that “No tax shall be levied or
collected except by authority of law.” Accordingly for levy of any tax, a law needs to
be framed by the government.
Constitution of India gives the power to levy and collect taxes, whether direct or
indirect, to the Central and the State Government. The Parliament and State
Legislatures are empowered to make laws on the matters enumerated in the
Seventh Schedule by virtue of Article 246 of the Constitution of India.
Seventh Schedule to Article 246 contains three lists which enumerate the matters
under which the Parliament and the State Legislatures have the authority to make
laws for the purpose of levy of taxes.
The following are the lists:
(i) Union List: Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws on the matters
contained in Union List.
(ii) State List: The Legislatures of any State has the exclusive power to make laws
on the matters contained in the State List.
(iii) Concurrent List: Both Parliament and State Legislatures have the power to
make laws on the matters contained in the Concurrent list.
Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List
i.e., List I in the Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of
India has given the power to the Parliament to make laws on taxes on
income other than agricultural income.
1.4 Overview of Income-tax law in India
In this material, we would be introducing the students to the Income-tax law in India.
The income-tax law in India consists of the following components –
INCOME TAX LAW
INCOME TAX
ACT
LEGAL
ANNUAL
DECISIONS OF
FINANCE ACT
COURTS
COMPONENTS
OF INCOME
TAX LAW
CIRCULARS/ INCOME TAX
NOTIFICATIONS RULES
The various instruments of law containing the law relating to income-tax are
explained below.
Income-tax Act, 1961
The levy of income-tax in India is governed by the Income-tax Act, 1961. In this
book, we shall briefly refer to this as the Act.
• It extends to the whole of India.
• It came into force on 1st April, 1962.
• It contains sections 1 to 298 and schedules I to XIV.
 A section may have sub-sections or clauses and sub-clauses.
 When each part of the section is independent of each other and
one is not related with other, such parts are called a “Clause”. “Sub
section”, on the other hand refers to such parts of a section where
each part is related with other and all sub sections taken together
completes the concept propounded in that section.
 Example
o The clauses of section 2 define the meaning of terms used
in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Clause (1A) defines
“agricultural income”, clause (1B) defines “amalgamation”
and so on. Each one of them is independent of other clause
of the same section.
o Likewise, the clauses of section 10 contain the exemptions
in respect of certain income, like clause (1) provides for
exemption of agricultural income and clause (2) provides for
exemption of share income of a member of a Hindu
Undivided Family and so on.
o Section 5 defining the scope of total income has two sub-
sections (1) and (2). Sub-section (1) defines the scope of
total income of a resident and sub-section (2) defines the
scope of total income of a non-resident. Each sub section is
related with the other in the sense that only when one reads
them all, one gets the complete idea related with scope of
total income.
 A section may also have Provisos and Explanations.
 The Proviso(s) to a section/sub-section/clause spells out the
exception(s)/ condition(s) to the provision contained in the
respective section/ sub-section/ clause, i.e., the proviso spells out
the cases where the provision contained in the respective section/
sub-section/ clause would not apply or where the provision would
apply with certain modification.
 The Explanation to a section/ sub-section/ clause gives a
clarification relating to the provision contained in the respective
section/ sub-section/ clause.
 Example
o Sections 80GGB and 80GGC provides for deduction from
gross total income in respect of contributions made by
companies and other persons, respectively, to political
parties or an electoral trust.
INCOME TAX LAW
o The proviso to sections 80GGB and 80GGC provide that no
deduction shall be allowed under those sections in respect
of any sum contributed by cash to political parties or an
electoral trust. Thus, the provisos to these sections spell out
the circumstance when deduction would not be available
thereunder in respect of contributions made.
o The Explanation below section 80GGC provides that for the
purposes of sections 80GGB and 80GGC, “political party”
means a political party registered under section 29A of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. Thus, the
Explanation clarifies that the political party has to be a
registered political party.
• The Income-tax Act, 1961 undergoes change every year with additions and
substitutions brought in by the Annual Finance Act passed by Parliament.
Sometimes, the Income-tax Act, 1961 is also amended through other
legislations like Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act.
The Finance Act
Every year, the Finance Minister of the Government of India introduces the Finance
Bill in the Parliament’s Budget Session. When the Finance Bill is passed by both the
houses of the Parliament and gets the assent of the President, it becomes the
Finance Act. Amendments are made every year to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and
other tax laws by the Finance Act.
The First Schedule to the Finance Act contains four parts which specify the rates of tax -
• Part I of the First Schedule to the Finance Act specifies the rates of tax
applicable for the current Assessment Year. Accordingly, Part I of the First
Schedule to the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024 specifies the rates of tax for F.Y.
2023-24.
• Part II specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for the current
Financial Year. Accordingly, Part II of the First Schedule to the Finance Act,
2024 specifies the rates at which tax is deductible at source for F.Y. 2024-25
• Part III gives the rates for calculating income-tax for deducting tax from
income chargeable under the head “Salaries” and computation of advance
tax for F.Y. 2024-25 where the assessee exercises the option to shift out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
• Part IV gives the rules for computing net agricultural income.
Income-tax Rules, 1962
The administration of direct taxes is looked after by the Central Board of Direct
Taxes (CBDT).
• The CBDT is empowered to make rules for carrying out the purposes of the
Act.
• For the proper administration of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the CBDT frames
rules from time to time. These rules are collectively called Income-tax Rules,
1962.
• Rules also have sub-rules, provisos and Explanations. The proviso to a Rule/
Sub-rule spells out the exception to the limits, conditions, guidelines, basis of
valuation, as the case may be, spelt out in the Rule/ Sub-rule. The Explanation
gives clarification for the purposes of the Rule.
• It is important to keep in mind that along with the Income-tax Act, 1961, these
rules should also be studied.
Circulars and Notifications
Circulars
• Circulars are issued by the CBDT from time to time to deal with certain specific
problems and to clarify doubts regarding the scope and meaning of certain
provisions of the Act.
• Circulars are issued for the guidance of the officers and/or assessees.
• The department is bound by the circulars. While such circulars are not binding
on the assessees, they can take advantage of beneficial circulars.
Notifications
Notifications are issued by the Central Government to give effect to the provisions
of the Act. The CBDT is also empowered to make and amend rules for the purposes
of the Act by issue of notifications which are binding on both department and
assessees.
INCOME TAX LAW
Legal decisions of Courts
Case Laws refer to decision given by courts. The study of case laws is an important
and unavoidable part of the study of Income-tax law. It is not possible for
Parliament to conceive and provide for all possible issues that may arise in the
implementation of any Act. Hence the judiciary will hear the disputes between the
assessees and the department and give decisions on various issues.
The Supreme Court is the Apex Court of the Country and the law laid down by the
Supreme Court is the law of the land. The decisions given by various High Courts
will apply in the respective states in which such High Courts have jurisdiction.
Note – Case laws are dealt with at the Final level.
2. CHARGE OF INCOME TAX
Section 4 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is the charging section which provides that:
(i) Tax shall be charged at the rates prescribed for the year by the Annual
Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both.
(ii) The charge is on every person specified under section 2(31);
(iii) Tax is chargeable on the total income earned during the previous year and
not the assessment year. (There are certain exceptions provided by sections
172, 174, 174A, 175 and 176);
(iv) Tax shall be levied in accordance with and subject to the various provisions
contained in the Act.
This section is the back bone of the law of income-tax in so far as it serves as the
most operative provision of the Act. The tax liability of a person springs from this
section.
A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), Association of
Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc.
(1) Total Income and Tax Payable
Income-tax is levied on an assessee’s total income. Such total income has to be
computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Let us go step by step to understand the procedure for computation of total income
of an individual for the purpose of levy of income-tax –
Step 1 – Determination of residential status
The residential status of a person has to be determined to ascertain which income
is to be included in computing the total income. The residential status as per the
Income-tax Act, 1961 can be classified as under –
RESIDENTIAL STATUS UNDER THE
INCOME TAX ACT, 1961
RESIDENT DEEMED NON-
RESIDENT RESIDENT
RESIDENT AND RESIDENT BUT NOT
ORDINARILY RESIDENT ORDINARILY RESIDENT
In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in India in the
relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the earlier previous years
determines his residential status. Based on the days spent by him in India, he may
be (a) resident and ordinarily resident, (b) resident but not ordinarily resident, or
(c) non-resident.
The residential status of a person determines the taxability of the income. For e.g.,
income earned and received outside India will not be taxable in the hands of a non-
resident but will be taxable in case of a resident and ordinarily resident.
There is also a concept of deemed resident for which presence of individual in India
is not required. A deemed resident is always a resident but not ordinarily resident
in India. Determination of residential status has been discussed in Chapter 2.
Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads
A person may earn income from different sources. For example, a salaried person
earns income by way of salary. He also gets interest from bank savings account/
fixed deposit. Apart from this, if he has invested in shares, he would be getting
dividend and when he sells these shares, he may earn profit on such sale. If he owns
a residential property which he has let out, he would earn rental income.
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of a tax
payer are classified into five different heads of income. These are shown below –
INCOME TAX LAW
HEADS OF INCOME
SALARIES INCOME PROFITS AND CAPITAL INCOME FROM
FROM GAINS OF GAINS OTHER
HOUSE BUSINESS OR SOURCES
PROPERTY PROFESSION
There is a charging section under each head of income which defines the scope of
income chargeable under that head. These heads of income exhaust all possible
types of income that can accrue to or be received by the tax payer. Accordingly,
income earned is classified as follows:
1. Salary, pension etc. earned is taxable under the head “Salaries”.
2. Rental income is taxable under the head “Income from house property”.
3. Income derived from carrying on any business or profession is taxable under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
4. Profit from sale of a capital asset (like land, building and shares) is taxable
under the head “Capital Gains”.
5. The fifth head of income is the residuary head. Income which is chargeable
to tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961 but not taxable under the first four
heads will be taxed under the head “Income from other sources”.
The tax payer has to classify the income earned under the relevant head of income.
Step 3 – Computation of income under each head
Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a particular
head of income.
Exemptions: There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax
e.g., agricultural income. These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part
of total income.
Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax e.g., Commuted pension.
These incomes are excluded only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. The
balance income over and above the prescribed exemption limits would enter
computation of total income and have to be classified under the relevant head of
income.
Deductions: There are deductions and allowances prescribed under each head of
income. For example, while calculating income from house property for let out
property, municipal taxes and interest on loan are allowed as deduction. Similarly,
deductions and allowances are prescribed under other heads of income. These
deductions etc. have to be considered before arriving at the net income chargeable
under each head.
These exemptions and deductions would be available to the individual depending upon
the regime in which he pays tax. Tax regime under section 115BAC is the default tax
regime which provides for concessional rates of tax to individuals/HUFs/
AoPs/BoIs/Artificial juridical persons. However, certain exemptions and deductions are
not allowed under the default tax regime. Such assessees have an option to opt out of
the said regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act. These tax regimes i.e.,
the default tax regime under section 115BAC and optional tax regime under the normal
provisions of the Act are discussed in detail later on in this Chapter.
For detailed discussion on exemptions and deductions under each head, refer to
Chapter 3: Heads of Income.
Disallowance of expenditure in relation to exempt income
[Section 14A]
 As per section 14A, notwithstanding anything to the contrary,
expenditure incurred in relation to any exempt income is not allowed as a
deduction while computing income under any of the five heads of income.
 The Assessing Officer is empowered to determine the amount of expenditure
incurred in relation to such income which does not form part of total income in
accordance with such method as may be prescribed.
 The method for determining expenditure in relation to exempt income for the
purpose of disallowance of such expenditure under section 14A is prescribed by
the CBDT.
 The provisions of section 14A regarding disallowance of expenses would apply
even in a case where exempt income has not accrued or arisen or has not been
received during the previous year relevant to an assessment year and the
expenditure has been incurred during the said previous year in relation to such
exempt income.
Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.
In case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total income.
The tax system is progressive i.e., as the income increases, the applicable rate of
INCOME TAX LAW
tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to
divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize
their tax burden.
In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been incorporated
in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse, minor child
etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted his income
for the purpose of computing tax liability. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter
4: Income of other persons included in assessee’s total income.
Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses
An assessee may have different sources of income under the same head of income.
He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. For instance, an
assessee may have profit from his textile business and loss from his printing
business. This loss can be set-off against the profits of textile business to arrive at
the net income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
Similarly, an assessee can have loss under one head of income, say, profits and
gains of business or profession and profits under another heads of income, say,
income from house property. There are provisions in the Income-tax Act, 1961 for
allowing inter-head adjustment in certain cases.
However, there are also restrictions in certain cases, like business loss is not allowed
to be set-off against salary income. Default tax regime under section 115BAC puts
further more restrictions like loss from house property cannot be set off from
income under any other head. Further, losses which cannot be set-off in the current
year due to inadequacy of eligible profits can be carried forward for set-off in the
subsequent years as per the provisions contained in the Act. Generally, brought
forward losses under a particular head cannot be set-off against income under
another head i.e., brought forward business loss cannot be set-off against income
from house property of the current year. For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 5:
Aggregation of income, set-off and carry forward of losses.
Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income
The final figures of income or loss under each head of income, after allowing the
eligible deductions, allowances and other adjustments, are then aggregated, after
giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry forward
of losses, to arrive at the gross total income.
Step 7 – Deductions from Gross Total Income
There are deductions prescribed from Gross Total Income. Two types of
deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under Chapter VI-
A and deduction under section 10AA. These deductions would be allowable to the
assessee who opts out of the default tax regime and pays tax under the optional
tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act, subject to fulfillment of requisite
conditions stipulated thereunder.
DEDUCTIONS FROM GROSS TOTAL INCOME
(in case of an assessee opting out of the default tax regime)
DEDUCTION UNDER
DEDUCTIONS UNDER CHAPTER-VIA
SECTION 10AA
DEDUCTIONS OTHER
DEDUCTIONS IN DEDUCTIONS IN
IN RESPECT OF DEDUCTIONS
RESPECT OF CERTAIN RESPECT OF
OTHER INCOME
PAYMENTS CERTAIN INCOMES
Example
Examples Examples Examples Deduction
1. Life Insurance Premium 1. Employment of new 1. Interest on in case of a
person with
paid employees deposits in disability
2. Contribution to 2. Royalty income etc. of saving
Provident Fund/ authors of certain account
Pension Fund books other than text 2. Interest on
3. Medical insurance books deposits in
premium paid 3. Royalty on patents case of senior
4. Payment of interest on citizens
loan taken for higher
education
5. Payment of interest on
loan taken for residential
house
6. Payment of interest on
loan taken for purchase
of electric vehicle
7. Rent paid
8. Donation to certain
funds, charitable
institutions, etc.
9. Contributions to political
parties
INCOME TAX LAW
However, under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, only select
deductions are permissible.
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 6: Deductions from Gross Total Income.
Step 8 – Computation of Total income
The income arrived at, after claiming the above deductions from the Gross Total Income
is known as the Total Income. It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as
per section 288A. The process of computation of total income is shown hereunder –
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
Determine the residential status
Classify income under five
heads
Salaries Income from Profits and gains Capital Income from
house property from business or gains other sources
profession
Compute income under each head applying the charging & deeming
provisions and providing for permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder
Apply clubbing provisions
Set-off/carry forward and
set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act/default tax regime
Compute Gross Total Income (GTI)
Less: Deductions from GTI
Total Income (TI)
Step 9 – Application of the rates of tax on the total income
Rates prescribed under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act for default tax
regime
Section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for concessional rates of
tax to individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons. Under this
regime certain exemptions/deductions are, however, not available like Leave
Travel Concession, interest on housing loan on self-occupied property,
deductions under Chapter VI-A [other than section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) or section
80JJAA] etc. The rates given under section 115BAC are the default tax rates unless
the assessee exercises an option to shift out of the said regime. The basic
exemption limit under section 115BAC is ` 3,00,000. This means that no tax is
payable by an assessee with total income of upto ` 3,00,000. The tax rates under
section 115BAC is as follows -
S. Total Income Rate of tax
No.
1. Upto ` 3,00,000 Nil
2. From ` 3,00,000 to ` 7,00,000 5%
3. From ` 7,00,000 to ` 10,00,000 10%
4. From ` 10,00,000 to ` 12,00,000 15%
5. From ` 12,00,000 to ` 15,00,000 20%
6. Above ` 15,00,000 30%
Rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax regime
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons, who exercise the option
to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC, have to pay tax as per
normal provisions of the Act. Under the normal provisions of the Act, the rates of
tax are prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of the year.
For individuals, HUF etc., the basic exemption limit is ` 2,50,000. This means that,
as per the normal provisions of the Act, no tax is payable by individuals with total
income of upto ` 2,50,000. Those individuals whose total income is more than
` 2,50,000 but less than or equal to ` 5,00,000 have to pay tax on their total income
in excess of ` 2,50,000@5%. Total income between ` 5,00,000 and ` 10,00,000
attracts tax @20%. The highest rate is 30%, which is attracted in respect of income
INCOME TAX LAW
in excess of ` 10,00,000. The tax rates have to be applied on the total income to
arrive at the income-tax liability.
However, resident individuals enjoy rebate under section 87A in both the tax
regimes which are discussed later on in this chapter.
For certain income (like Long Term Capital Gains, Lottery Income, Specified Short
Term Capital Gains etc.), slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes.
These incomes are taxable at special rates of taxation under both the tax regimes.
These special rates are contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961 itself.
Step 10 - Surcharge / Rebate under section 87A
Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax.
Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax, where total income exceeds
` 50 lakhs. The rates of surcharge applicable for different slabs of total income are
discussed later on in this chapter.
Rebate under section 87A: In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax
payers, section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being
an individual resident in India, whose total income does not exceed ` 7,00,000
under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or ` 5,00,000 under the normal
provisions of the Act if he opts out of the default tax regime. Under the default tax
regime, an individual whose total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs marginally is also
entitled to a rebate of the difference between tax on total income and the amount
by which the total income exceeds ` 7 lakhs, when the former is greater than the
latter.
Step 11 – Health and education cess on income-tax
The income-tax, as increased by the surcharge or as reduced by the rebate under
section 87A, if applicable, is to be further increased by an additional surcharge
called health and education cess on income-tax @4% of income-tax plus surcharge,
if applicable.
Step 12 – Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains certain profit-linked and investment linked
deductions under normal provisions of the Act to promote investment in various
sectors. These tax benefits help to reduce the tax liability of the taxpayers who
exercise the option to opt out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC and
become eligible to claim such deductions. In order to preserve the tax base vis-a-
vis profit linked and investment linked deductions, the Income-tax Act, 1961
provides for levy of alternate minimum tax. Section 115JC provides for minimum
tax to be paid by the taxpayers on their total income without providing profit linked
and investment linked deductions. However, the taxpayer can claim the tax credit
of the excess tax paid over the regular income-tax payable.
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical persons paying tax under default
tax regime under section 115BAC, are not liable to alternate minimum tax under
section 115JC.
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 9: Income-tax liability – Computation and
Optimisation.
Step 13 – Examine whether to pay tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular
provisions of the Act
Total income and tax liability of individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs and artificial juridical
persons may be computed in accordance with both the default tax regime under
section 115BAC and as per the regular provisions of the Act including provisions
relating to AMT, if applicable. Then, such persons can determine which is more
beneficial and accordingly decide whether or not to opt out of the default tax
regime under section 115BAC.
Individuals/HUF/AoPs/BoIs not having income from business or profession can
choose whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime in each previous year. They may choose to pay tax under default tax regime
under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default
tax regime in another year.
Step 14 – Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source
Although the tax liability of an assessee is determined only at the end of the year,
tax is required to be paid in advance in four installments on the basis of estimated
income i.e., on or before 15th June, 15th September, 15th December and 15th March.
However, residents declaring profits under presumptive taxation scheme (where
business or professional income is computed as a percentage of gross
receipts/turnover) can pay advance tax in one installment on or before 15th March
instead of four installments. In certain cases, tax is required to be deducted at
source from the income by the payer at the rates prescribed in the Income-tax Act,
INCOME TAX LAW
1961 or the Annual Finance Act. Such deduction should be made either at the time
of accrual or at the time of payment, as prescribed by the Act.
Example: In the case of salary income, the obligation of the employer to deduct
tax at source arises only at the time of payment of salary to the employees.
However, in respect of other payments like, fees for professional services, fees for
technical services, interest payable to residents, the person responsible for paying
is liable to deduct tax at source at the time of credit of such income to the account
of the payee or at the time of payment, whichever is earlier. Such tax deducted at
source has to be remitted to the credit of the Central Government through any
branch of the RBI, SBI or any authorized bank within the statutory due dates.
For detailed discussion, refer to Chapter 7: Advance tax, tax deduction at source and
tax collection at source.
Step 15: Tax Payable/Tax Refundable
After adjusting the advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source, the assessee
would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such amount should
be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10 as per section 288B.
The assessee has to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) on
or before the due date of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee
will get the same after filing the return of income.
(2) Return of Income
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains provisions for filing of return of income. Return
of income is the format in which the assessee furnishes information as to his total
income and tax payable. The format for filing of returns by different assessees is
notified by the CBDT. The particulars of income earned under different heads, gross
total income, deductions from gross total income, total income and tax payable by
the assessee are required to be furnished in the return of income. In short, a return
of income is the declaration of income by the assessee in the prescribed format.
The Act has prescribed due dates for filing return of income in case of different
assessees. Companies and firms have to mandatorily file their return of income
before the due date. Other assessees are required to file a return of income subject
to fulfilling of certain conditions.
3. IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS
In order to understand the provisions of the Act, one must have a thorough
knowledge of the meanings of certain key terms like ‘person’, ‘assessee’, ‘income’,
etc. To understand the meanings of these terms we have to first check whether they
are defined in the Act.
Terms defined in the Act: Section 2 gives definitions of the various terms and
expressions used therein. If a particular definition is given in the Act itself, we have
to be guided by that definition. For e.g. the term ‘perquisite’ has been defined
under section 17(2) for the purpose of taxation of salaries.
Terms not defined under the Act: If a particular definition is not given in the Act,
reference can be made to the General Clauses Act or dictionaries.
Students should note this point carefully because certain terms like “dividend”,
“transfer”, etc. have been given a wider meaning in the Income-tax Act, 1961 than
they are commonly understood. Some of the important terms defined under
section 2 are given below:
3.1 Assessee [Section 2(7)]
“Assessee” means a person by whom any tax or any other sum of money is payable
under this Act. In addition, it includes –
• Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under this Act has been
taken for the assessment of
 his income; or
 the income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable; or
 the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or
 the amount of refund due to him or to such other person.
• Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of this
Act;
• Every person who is deemed to be an assessee-in-default under any provision
of this Act.
• Every assessee is a ‘person’, but every ‘person’ need not be an assessee.
INCOME TAX LAW
3.2 Assessment [Section 2(8)]
This is the procedure by which the income of an assessee is determined. It may be
by way of a normal assessment or by way of reassessment of an income previously
assessed. Assessment Procedure will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.
3.3 Person [Section 2(31)]
The definition of ‘assessee’ leads us to the definition of ‘person’ as the former is
closely connected with the latter. The term ‘person’ is important from another point
of view also viz., the charge of income-tax is on every ‘person’.
Individual
Artificial
juridical HUF
person
Person
Local
Company
Authority
AOP/BOI Firm
We may briefly consider some of the above seven categories of person each of
which constitutes a separate unit of assessment or a separate tax entity.
(i) Individual
The term ‘individual’ means only a natural person, i.e., a human being.
• It includes both males and females.
• It also includes a minor or a person of unsound mind. But the assessment in
such a case may be made1 on the guardian or manager of the minor or lunatic
1 under section 161(1)
who is entitled to receive his income. In the case of deceased person,
assessment would be made on the legal representative.
(ii) HUF
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, a Hindu undivided family (HUF) is treated as a
separate entity for the purpose of assessment. It is included in the definition of the
term “person” under section 2(31). The levy of income-tax is on “every person”.
Therefore, income-tax is payable by a HUF.
"Hindu undivided family" has not been defined under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
The expression is, however, defined under the Hindu Law as a family, which consists
of all males lineally descended from a common ancestor and includes their wives
and daughters.
Some members of the HUF are called co-parceners. They are related to each other
and to the head of the family. HUF may contain many members, but members
within four degrees including the head of the family (Karta) are called co-parceners.
A Hindu Coparcenary includes those persons who acquire an interest in joint family
property by birth. Earlier, only male descendants were considered as coparceners.
With effect from 6th September, 2005, daughters have also been accorded
coparcenary status. It may be noted that only the coparceners have a right to
partition.
A daughter of coparcener by birth shall become a coparcener in her own right in
the same manner as the son. Being a coparcener, she can claim partition of assets
of the family. The rights of a daughter in coparcenary property are equal to that of
a son. However, other female members of the family, for example, wife or daughter-
in-law of a coparcener are not eligible for such coparcenary rights.
The relation of a HUF does not arise from a contract but arises from status. There
need not be more than one male member or one female coparcener w.e.f.
6th September, 2005 to form a HUF. The Income-tax Act, 1961 also does not indicate
that a HUF as an assessable entity must consist of at least two male members or
two coparceners.
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, Jain undivided families and Sikh undivided families
would also be assessed as a HUF.
INCOME TAX LAW
Schools of Hindu Law
Dayabaga school Mitakshara school
Rest of India except West
West Bengal and Assam
Bengal and Assam
The basic difference between the two schools of Hindu law with regard to
succession is as follows:
Dayabaga school of Hindu law Mitakshara school of Hindu law
Prevalent in West Bengal and Assam Prevalent in rest of India
Nobody acquires the right, share in the One acquires the right to the family
property by birth as long as the head of property by his birth and not by
family is living. succession irrespective of the fact
that his elders are living.
Thus, the children do not acquire any
right, share in the family property, as Thus, every child born in the family
long as his father is alive and only on acquires a right/share in the family
death of the father, the children will property.
acquire right/share in the property.
Hence, the father and his brothers would
be the coparceners of the HUF.
(iii) Company [Section 2(17)]
For all purposes of the Act, the term ‘Company’, has a much wider connotation than
that under the Companies Act, 2013. Under the Act, the expression ‘Company’ means:
(1) any Indian company as defined in section 2(26); or
(2) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a country outside
India, i.e., any foreign company; or
(3) any institution, association or body which is assessable or was assessed as a
company for any assessment year under the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 or for
any assessment year commencing on or before 1.4.1970 under the present Act; or
(4) any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or not and whether
Indian or non-Indian, which is declared by a general or special order of the
CBDT to be a company for such assessment years as may be specified in the
CBDT’s order.
Classes of Companies
(1) Domestic company and Foreign Company: Companies can be classified
into two categories, viz. (1) Domestic company and (2) Foreign company.
Domestic company [Section 2(22A)] - It means an "Indian company" or any
other company that has made the necessary arrangements to declare and pay
dividends (including those on preference shares) within India from its income
that is subject to income tax.
Indian company [Section 2(26)] - A company is considered an "Indian
company" under section 2(26) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 if it meets two key
conditions:
1. Formation and Registration: The company should have been formed
and registered under the Companies Act, 19562.
2. Office Location: The company's registered or principal office should be
in India.
Additionally, the term "Indian company" also includes the following provided
their registered or principal office in India:
• Corporation established by or under a Central, State, or Provincial Act,
such as Financial Corporation or State Road Transport Corporation.
• Institution, association, or body declared by the Board to be a company
under section 2(17)(iv).
• Company formed and registered under any law in force in any part of
India, excluding Jammu and Kashmir and specific Union territories.
• Company formed and registered under any law in force in Jammu and
Kashmir.
• Company formed and registered under any law in force in Union
territories like Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Pondicherry, or
the State of Goa.
Foreign company [Section 2(23A)] - Foreign company means a company
which is not a domestic company
2 Now Companies Act, 2013
INCOME TAX LAW
Classes of companies
Domestic company Foreign company
Indian Company which has made A company which
company arrangement for declaring and is not a domestic
paying dividend within India company
out of the income chargeable
to tax in India.
(2) A company is further classified into two primary categories based on
public interest:
Widely Held Company (Company in which public are substantially
interested): A company is considered to have substantial public interest if it
meets any of the following criteria as outlined in section 2(18) of the Income-
tax Act, 1961:
(a) Government or RBI Ownership or participation: A company owned
by the Central or State Government or the Reserve Bank of India (RBI),
or where at least 40% of the shares are held (whether singly or taken
together) by the Government or the RBI or a corporation owned by the
RBI.
(b) Company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956:
A company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 19563,
which is formed to promote commerce, art, science, education,
research, social welfare, charity, environmental protection, etc., and
does not distribute dividends to their members.
(c) Companies with No Share Capital and declared by the CBDT: A
company which does not have share capital and is declared by the CBDT
to be a company in which the public are substantially interested for
specified assessment years.
(d) Mutual Benefit Finance Company (Nidhi or Mutual Benefit Society):
A company that primarily accept deposits from its members and is
3 Section 8 of the Companies Act, 2013
declared by the Central Government under Section 620A of the
Companies Act, 19564, to be a Nidhi or Mutual Benefit Society.
(e) Cooperative Society ownership: A company whose equity shares
carrying at least 50% of the voting power are unconditionally allotted
or acquired by one or more cooperative societies and held throughout
the relevant previous year.
(f) Public Limited Company: A company which is not a private company
as defined in the Companies Act, 19565 and which fulfills any of the
following conditions:
- its equity shares were listed in a recognized stock exchange in
India as on the last day of the relevant previous year; or
- its equity shares carrying at least 50% (40% in case of an Indian
company in ship construction business or in the manufacture or
processing of goods or in mining or in generation or distribution
of electricity or any other form of power) voting power have been
unconditionally allotted to or acquired by and should have been
beneficially held throughout the relevant previous year by
(a) Government or
(b) a Statutory Corporation or
(c) a company in which public are substantially interested or
(d) any wholly owned subsidiary of company mentioned in (c).
Closely Held Company (Company in which public are not substantially
interested): Any company that does not meet the criteria for being classified
as widely held company is considered closely held company. Thus, all private
limited companies will be treated as companies in which public are not
substantially interested.
(iv) Firm [Section 2(23)]
The terms ‘firm’, ‘partner’ and ‘partnership’ have the same meanings as assigned to
them in the Indian Partnership Act, 1932. In addition, the definitions also include
4 Section 406 of the Companies Act, 2013
INCOME TAX LAW
the terms limited liability partnership and a partner of limited liability partnership
as they have been defined in the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008.
In an LLP, since liability of the partners is limited to their agreed contribution
therein, it contains elements of both a corporate structure as well as a partnership
firm structure.
However, for income-tax purposes a minor admitted to the benefits of an existing
partnership would also be treated as partner.
Firm
As defined
As defined
under the
under the
Limited
Partnership
Liability
Act, 1932
Partnership
Act, 2008
A partnership is the relation between persons who have agreed to share
the profits of business carried on by all or any of them acting for all. The
persons who have entered into partnership with one another are called
individually ‘partners’ and collectively a ‘firm’.
(v) Association of Persons (AOP)
When persons combine together for promotion of joint enterprise they are
assessable as an AOP, if they do not in law constitute a partnership. In order to
constitute an association, persons must join for a common purpose or action and
their object must be to produce income; it is not enough that the persons receive
the income jointly. Co-heirs, co-legatees or co-donees joining together for a
common purpose or action would be chargeable as an AOP.
For e.g., Mr. Yash, AB & Co. (Firm) and X (P) Ltd. join together to carry on
construction activity otherwise than as a partnership firm, such an association will
be recognized as an association of persons.
(vi) Body of Individuals (BOI)
It denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees who merely receive the
income jointly and who may be assessable in like manner and to the same extent
as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-executors or co-trustees are assessable
as a BOI as their title and interest are indivisible. Income-tax shall not be payable
by an assessee in respect of the receipt of share of income by him from BOI and on
which the tax has already been paid by such BOI. For e.g., mutual trade associations,
members club, etc.
Section 2(31) further explains that an association of persons or a body of individuals
shall be treated as a person, whether or not it was formed with the object of
deriving income, profits or gains. Accordingly, even if such entities have been
formed not for earning any income/ profit still they are "person" for the purpose of
the Act and are covered by the provisions of the Act.
Difference between AOP and BOI:
In case of a BOI, only individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any
person can be its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member
of AOP but not of BOI.
In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will for a
common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common will may or
may not be present.
(vii) Local Authority
The term “Local Authority” means a municipal committee, district board, body of
port commissioners or other authority legally entitled to or entrusted by the
Government with the control or management of a municipal or local fund.
Note: A local authority is taxable in respect of that part of its income which arises
from any business carried on by it in so far as that income does not arise from the
supply of a commodity or service within its own jurisdictional area. However,
income arising from the supply of water and electricity even outside the local
authority’s own jurisdictional area is exempt from tax.
INCOME TAX LAW
(viii) Artificial Juridical Persons
Artificial Juridical Persons are the entities which are not natural persons but are
separate entities in the eyes of law. This is a residual category could cover all
artificial persons with a juristic personality not falling under any other category of
persons. Deities, Bar Council, Universities are some important examples of Artificial
Juridical Persons.
3.4 Income [Section 2(24)]
(1) Definition of Income
The definition of income as per the Income-tax Act, 1961 begins with the words
“Income includes”. Therefore, it is an inclusive definition and not an exhaustive one.
Such a definition does not confine the scope of income but leaves room for more
inclusions within the ambit of the term.
Section 2(24) of the Act gives a statutory definition of income. The following items
of receipts are specifically included in the said definition:—
(1) Profits and gains;
(2) Dividends;
(3) The value of any perquisite or profit in lieu of salary taxable under section
17(2)/(3);
(4) Any special allowance or benefit, other than the perquisite included above,
specifically granted to the assessee to meet expenses wholly, necessarily and
exclusively for the performance of the duties of an office or employment of
profit;
(5) Any allowance granted to the assessee to meet his personal expenses at the
place where the duties of his office or employment of profit are ordinarily
performed by him or at a place where he ordinarily resides or to compensate
him for the increased cost of living;
(6) The value of any benefit or perquisite whether convertible into money or not,
obtained from a company either by a director or by a person who has a
substantial interest in the company or by a relative of the director or such
person and any sum paid by any such company in respect of any obligation
which, but for such payment, would have been payable by the director or
other person aforesaid;
(7) Profits and gains of business or profession chargeable to tax under section
28(ii)/(iii)/(iiia)/(iiib)/(iiic)/(v)/(va);
(8) Deemed profits chargeable to tax under section 41 or section 59;
(9) The value of any benefit or perquisite taxable under section 28(iv);
(10) Any capital gains chargeable under section 45;
(11) Any winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races including horse races,
card games and other games of any sort or from gambling, or betting of any
form or nature whatsoever. For this purpose,
(i) “Lottery” includes winnings from prizes awarded to any person by draw
of lots or by chance or in any other manner whatsoever, under any
scheme or arrangement by whatever name called;
(ii) “Card game and other game of any sort” includes any game show, an
entertainment programme on television or electronic mode, in which
people compete to win prizes or any other similar game;
(12) Any sum received by the assessee from his employees as contributions to any
provident fund (PF) or superannuation fund or Employees State Insurance
Fund (ESI) or any other fund for the welfare of such employees;
(13) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy will constitute income;
“Keyman insurance policy” means a life insurance policy taken by a person on
the life of another person where the latter is or was an employee of former
or is or was connected in any manner whatsoever with the former’s business.
It also includes such policy which has been assigned to a person with or
without any consideration, at any time during the term of the policy.
(14) Fair market value of inventory as on the date of its conversion into or
treatment as a capital asset under section 28(via);
(15) Any sum of money received as advance, if such sum is forfeited consequent
to failure of negotiation for transfer of a capital asset [Section 56(2)(ix)];
(16) Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration or for
inadequate consideration by any person [Section 56(2)(x)];
INCOME TAX LAW
(17) Any compensation or other payment, due to or received by any person, in
connection with termination of his employment or the modification of the
term and conditions relating thereto [Section 56(2)(xi)];
(18) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a LIP
other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not exempt
u/s 10(10D), to the extent the same exceeds the aggregate of the premium
paid during the term of the policy, and not claimed as deduction under any
other provision of the Act [Section 56(2)(xiii)];
[For details, refer to Unit 5 of Chapter 3: Income from Other Sources]
(19) Assistance in the form of a subsidy or grant or cash incentive or duty
drawback or waiver or concession or reimbursement, by whatever name
called, by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority or
body or agency in cash or kind to the assessee is included in the definition of
income.
However, subsidy or grant or reimbursement which has been taken into
account for determination of the actual cost of the depreciable asset in
accordance with Explanation 10 to section 43(1) shall not be included in the
definition of income.
(2) Concept of Income under the Income-tax Act, 1961
 Regular receipt vis-a-vis casual receipt: Income, in general, means a
periodic monetary return which accrues or is expected to accrue regularly
from definite sources. However, under the Income-tax Act, 1961, even certain
casual receipts which do not arise regularly are treated as income for tax
purposes e.g. Winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles.
 Revenue receipt vis-a-vis Capital receipt: Income normally refers to
revenue receipts. Capital receipts are generally not included within the scope
of income in general parlance. However, the Income-tax Act, 1961 has
specifically included certain capital receipts within the definition of income
e.g., Capital gains i.e., gains on sale of capital assets like land, jewellery.
 Net receipt vis-a-vis Gross receipt: Income means net receipts and not
gross receipts. Net receipts are arrived at after deducting the expenditure
incurred in connection with earning such receipts. The expenditure which can
be deducted while computing income under each head is prescribed under
the Income-tax Act, 1961. Income from certain eligible businesses/
professions is also determined on presumptive basis i.e., as a certain
percentage of gross receipts. [We will discuss in detail in Unit 3 of Chapter 3:
Profits and gains of business or profession].
 Due basis vis-a-vis receipt basis: Income is taxable either on due basis or
receipt basis. For computing income under the heads “Profits and gains of
business or profession” and “Income from other sources”, the method of
accounting regularly employed by the assessee should be considered, which
can be either cash system or mercantile system. Some receipts are taxable
only on receipt basis, like, income by way of interest received on
compensation or enhanced compensation.
 Application of Income vis-a-vis Diversion of Income: Application of
income means to discharge an obligation (which is gratuitous or self-
imposed) after such income reaches the assessee. Where by virtue of an
obligation by overriding title, income is diverted before it reaches the
assessee, it is known as diversion of income. In case of the former, the income
would be taxable in the hands of the person who applies it, whereas in the
case of the latter, it is not taxable (i.e., even if the assessee were to collect the
income he does so on behalf of the person to whom it is payable).
(3) Concept of revenue and capital receipts
Students should carefully study the various items of receipts included in the
definition of income. Some of them like capital gains are not revenue receipts.
However, since they have been included in the definition, they are chargeable as
income under the Act. The concept of revenue and capital receipts is discussed
hereunder -
The Act contemplates a levy of tax on income and not on capital and hence it is
very essential to distinguish between capital and revenue receipts. Capital receipts
cannot be taxed, unless they fall within the scope of the definition of “income” and
so the distinction between capital and revenue receipts is material for tax purposes.
Certain capital receipts which have been specifically included in the definition of
income are compensation for modification or termination of services, income by
way of capital gains etc.
It is not possible to lay down any single test as infallible or any single criterion as
decisive, final and universal in application to determine whether a particular receipt
INCOME TAX LAW
is capital or revenue in nature. Hence, the capital or revenue nature of the receipt
must be determined with reference to the facts and circumstances of each case.
Criteria for determining whether a receipt is capital or revenue in nature
The following are some of the important criteria which may be applied to
distinguish between capital and revenue receipts.
Fixed capital or Circulating capital: A receipt referable to fixed capital would be
a capital receipt whereas a receipt referable to circulating capital would be a
revenue receipt. The former is not taxable while the latter is taxable. Tangible and
intangible assets which the owner keeps in his possession for making profits are in
the nature of fixed capital. The circulating capital is one which is turned over and
yields income or loss in the process.
Income from transfer of capital asset or trading asset: Profits arising from the
sale of a capital asset are chargeable to tax as capital gains under section 45
whereas profits arising from the sale of a trading asset being of revenue nature are
taxable as income from business under section 28 provided that the sale is in the
regular course of assessee’s business or the transaction constitutes an adventure
in the nature of trade.
Capital Receipts vis-a-vis Revenue Receipts: Tests to be applied
(1) Transaction entered into the course of business: Profits arising from
transactions which are entered into in the course of the business regularly
carried on by the assessee, or are incidental to, or associated with the
business of the assessee would be revenue receipts chargeable to tax.
Example: A banker’s or financier’s dealings in foreign exchange or sale of
shares and securities, a shipbroker’s purchase of ship in his own name, a share
broker’s purchase of shares on his own account would constitute transactions
entered and yielding income in the ordinary course of their business. Whereas
building and land would constitute capital assets in the hands of a trader in
shares, the same would constitute stock-in-trade in the hands of a property
dealer.
(2) Profit arising from sale of shares and securities: In the case of profit arising
from the sale of shares and securities, the nature of the profit has to be
ascertained from the motive, intention or purpose with which they were bought.
If the shares were acquired as an investor or with a view to acquiring a controlling
interest or for obtaining a managing or selling agency or a directorship, the profit
or loss on their sale would be of a capital nature; but if the shares were acquired
in the ordinary course of business as a dealer in shares, it would constitute his
stock-in-trade. If the shares were acquired with speculative motive, the profit or
loss (although of a revenue nature) would have to be dealt with separately from
the profit or loss of other businesses.
Securities held by Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested
in such securities in accordance with the regulations made under
the SEBI Act, 1992 would be treated as a capital asset. Even if the
nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is stock-
in-trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on transfer
would be taxable as capital gains.
(3) A single transaction - Can it constitute business? Even a single transaction
may constitute a business or an adventure in the nature of trade even if it is
outside the normal course of the assessee’s business. Repetition of such
transactions is not necessary. Thus, a bulk purchase followed by a bulk sale
or a series of retail sales or bulk sale followed by a series of retail purchases
would constitute an adventure in the nature of trade and consequently, the
income arising therefrom would be taxable. Purchase of any article with no
intention to resell it, but resold under changed circumstances would be a
transaction of a capital nature and capital gains would arise. However, where
an asset is purchased with the intention to resell it, the question whether the
profit on sale is capital or revenue in nature depends upon (i) the conduct of
the assessee, (ii) the nature and quantity of the article purchased, (iii) the
nature of the operations involved, (iv) whether the venture is on capital or
revenue account, and (v) other related circumstances of the case.
(4) Liquidated damages: Receipt of liquidated damages directly and intimately
linked with the procurement of a capital asset, which lead to delay in coming
into existence of the profit-making apparatus, is a capital receipt. The amount
received by the assessee towards compensation for sterilization of the profit
earning source is not in the ordinary course of business. Hence, it is a capital
receipt in the hands of the assessee.
(5) Compensation on termination of agency/service contract: Where an
assessee receives compensation on termination of the agency business being
the only source of income, the receipt is of capital nature, but taxable under
section 28(ii)(c). However, where the assessee has a number of agencies and
one of them is terminated and compensation is received therefor, the receipt
would be of a revenue nature since taking up an agency and exploiting the
same for earning income is in the ordinary course of business. The loss of one
INCOME TAX LAW
agency would be made good by profit from another agency. Compensation
received from the employer or from any person for premature termination of
the service contract is a capital receipt, but is taxable as profit in lieu of salary
under section 17(3) or as income from other sources under section 56(2)(xi),
respectively. Compensation received or receivable in connection with the
termination or the modification of the terms and conditions of any contract
relating to its business shall be taxable as business income.
(6) Gifts: Normally, gifts constitute a capital receipt in the hands of the recipient.
However, certain gifts are brought within the purview of income-tax, for
example, receipt of property without consideration is brought to tax under
section 56(2)(x).
For example, any sum of money or value of property received without
consideration or for inadequate consideration by any person, other than a
relative, is chargeable under the head “Income from Other Sources” [For
details, refer to Unit - 5 of Chapter 3: Income from Other Sources].
3.5 India [Section 2(25A)]
The term 'India' means –
(i) the territory of India as per Article 1 of the Constitution,
(ii) its territorial waters, seabed and subsoil underlying such waters,
(iii) continental shelf,
(iv) exclusive economic zone or
(v) any other specified maritime zone and the air space above its territory and
territorial waters.
Specified maritime zone means the maritime zone as referred to in the Territorial
Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other Maritime Zones Act,
1976.
3.6 Agricultural income [Section 2(1A)]
Agricultural income definition is very wide and covers the income of not only the
cultivators but also the land holders who might have rented out the lands.
Agricultural income may be received in cash or in kind.
Agricultural income may arise in any one of the following three ways:-
(1) It may be rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for
agricultural purposes.
(2) It may be income derived from such land by
(a) agriculture or
(b) the performance of a process ordinarily employed by a cultivator or
receiver of rent in kind to render the produce fit to be taken to the
market or
(c) the sale, by a cultivator or receiver of rent in kind, of such agricultural
produce raised or received by him, in respect of which no process
has been performed other than a process of the nature mentioned in
point (b) above.
(3) Lastly, agricultural income may be derived from any farm building required
for agricultural operations.
Now let us take a critical look at the following aspects:
(1) Rent or revenue derived from land situated in India and used for
agricultural purposes: The following three conditions have to be satisfied
for income to be treated as agricultural income:
(a) Rent or revenue should be derived from land;
(b) land has to be situated in India (If agricultural land is situated in a
foreign country, the entire income would be taxable); and
(c) land should be used for agricultural purposes.
The amount received in money or in kind, by one person from another for
right to use land is termed as Rent. The rent can either be received by the
owner of the land or by the original tenant from the sub-tenant. It implies
that ownership of land is not necessary. Thus, the rent received by the original
tenant from sub-tenant would also be agricultural income subject to the other
conditions mentioned above.
The scope of the term “Revenue” is much broader than rent. It includes
income other than rent. For example, fees received for renewal for grant of
land on lease would be revenue derived from land.
(2) Income derived from such land by
(a) Agriculture
The term “Agriculture” has not been defined in the Act. However,
cultivation of a field involving human skill and labour on the land can
be broadly termed as agriculture.
INCOME TAX LAW
“Agriculture” means tilling of the land, sowing of the seeds and similar
operations. It involves basic operations and subsequent operations.
Basic Subsequent
Operations Operations
Those operations Operations to be
by agriculturists performed after the
which are produce sprouts from
absolutely the land (e.g.,
necessary for the weeding, digging etc.)
purpose of are subsequent opera-
effectively raising tions. These
producefromthe subsequentoperations
land are the would be agricultural
basicoperations. operations only when
taken in conjunction
with and as a
continuation of the
basicoperations.
Note: The term ‘agriculture’ cannot be extended to all activities which
have some distant relation to land like dairy farming, breeding and
rearing of live stock, butter and cheese making and poultry farming.
This aspect is discussed in detail later on in this chapter.
Whether income from nursery constitutes agricultural
income?
Yes, as per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from
saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would be deemed to be agricultural
income, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on land.
(b) Process ordinarily employed to render the produce fit to be taken
to the market: Sometimes, to make the agricultural produce a saleable
commodity, it becomes necessary to perform some kind of process on
the produce. The income from the process employed to render the
produce fit to be taken to the market would be agricultural income.
However, it must be a process ordinarily employed by the cultivator or
receiver of rent in kind and the process must be applied to make the
produce fit to be taken to the market.
The ordinary process employed to render the produce fit to be taken to
market includes thrashing, winnowing, cleaning, drying, crushing etc.
For example, the process ordinarily employed by the cultivator to obtain
the rice from paddy is to first remove the hay from the basic grain, and
thereafter to remove the chaff from the grain. The grain has to be
properly filtered to remove stones etc. and finally the rice has to be
packed in gunny bags for sale in the market.
After such process, the rice can be taken to the market for sale. This
process of making the rice ready for the market may involve manual
operations or mechanical operations. All these operations constitute
the process ordinarily employed to make the product fit for the market.
The produce must retain its original character in spite of the processing
unless there is no market for selling it in that condition.
However, if marketing process is performed on a produce which can be
sold in its raw form, income derived therefrom is partly agricultural
income and partly business income.
(c) Sale of such agricultural produce in the market: Any income from the
sale of any produce to the cultivator or receiver of rent-in kind is
agricultural income provided it is from the land situated in India and
used for agricultural purposes. However, if the produce is subjected to
any process other than process ordinarily employed to make the
produce fit for market, the income arising on sale of such produce
would be partly agricultural income and partly non-agricultural income.
Similarly, if other agricultural produce like tea, cotton, tobacco,
sugarcane etc. are subjected to manufacturing process and the
manufactured product is sold, the profit on such sale will consist of
agricultural income as well as business income. That portion of the
profit representing agricultural income will be exempted.
Apportionment of Income between business income and
agricultural income: Rules 7, 7A, 7B & 8 of Income-tax Rules, 1962
provide the basis of apportionment of income between agricultural
income and business income.
(i) Rule 7 - Income from growing and manufacturing of any
product - Where income is partially agricultural income and
partially income chargeable to income-tax as business income,
INCOME TAX LAW
the market value of any agricultural produce which has been
raised by the assessee or received by him as rent in kind and which
has been utilised as raw material in such business or the sale
receipts of which are included in the accounts of the business shall
be deducted. No further deduction shall be made in respect of
any expenditure incurred by the assessee as a cultivator or
receiver of rent in kind.
Determination of market value - There are two possibilities here:
(I) The agricultural produce is capable of being sold in the market
either in its raw stage or after application of any ordinary
process to make it fit to be taken to the market. In such a case,
the value calculated at the average price at which it has been so
sold during the relevant previous year will be the market value.
(II) It is possible that the agricultural produce is not capable of
being ordinarily sold in the market in its raw form or after
application of any ordinary process. In such case the market
value will be the total of the following:—
• The expenses of cultivation;
• The land revenue or rent paid for the area in which
it was grown; and
• Such amount as the Assessing Officer finds having
regard to the circumstances in each case to
represent at reasonable profit.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. B grows sugarcane and uses the same for the purpose of
manufacturing sugar in his factory. 30% of sugarcane produce is sold
for ` 10 lakhs, and the cost of cultivation of such sugarcane is
` 5 lakhs. The cost of cultivation of the balance sugarcane (70%) is
` 14 lakhs and the market value of the same is ` 22 lakhs. After
incurring ` 1.5 lakhs in the manufacturing process on the balance
sugarcane, the sugar was sold for ` 25 lakhs. Compute B’s business
income and agricultural income.
SOLUTION
Computation of Business Income and Agriculture
Income of Mr. B
Particulars Business Agricultural Income
Income
(`) (`) (`)
Sale of Sugar
Business income
Sale Proceeds of sugar 25,00,000
Less: Market value of sugar- 22,00,000
cane (70%)
Less: Manufacturing exp. 1,50,000
1,50,000
Agricultural income
Market value of sugarcane 22,00,000
(70%)
Less: Cost of cultivation 14,00,000
8,00,000
Sale of sugarcane
Agricultural Income
Sale proceeds of sugarcane 10,00,000
(30%)
Less: Cost of cultivation 5,00,000
5,00,000
13,00,000
(ii) Rule 7A – Income from growing and manufacturing of rubber
- This rule is applicable when income derived from the sale of
centrifuged latex or cenex or latex based crepes or brown crepes
or technically specified block rubbers manufactured or processed
INCOME TAX LAW
from field latex or coagulum obtained from rubber plants grown
by the seller in India. In such cases, 35% profits on sale is taxable
as business income under the head “Profits and gains from
business or profession”, and the balance 65% is agricultural
income which is exempt.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. C manufactures latex from the rubber plants grown by him in
India. These are then sold in the market for ` 30 lakhs. The cost of
growing rubber plants is ` 10 lakhs and that of manufacturing latex
is ` 8 lakhs. Compute his total income.
SOLUTION
The total income of Mr. C comprises of agricultural income and
business income.
Total profits from the sale of latex= ` 30 lakhs – ` 10 lakhs –
` 8 lakhs= ` 12 lakhs.
Agricultural income = 65% of ` 12 lakhs = ` 7.8 lakhs
Business income = 35% of ` 12 lakhs = ` 4.2 lakhs
(iii) Rule 7B – Income from growing and manufacturing of coffee
a) In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and
cured by the seller in India, 25% profits on sale is taxable as
business income under the head “Profits and gains from
business or profession”, and the balance 75% is agricultural
income and is exempt.
b) In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured,
roasted and grounded by the seller in India, with or without
mixing chicory or other flavoring ingredients, 40% profits on
sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and
gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is
agricultural income and is exempt.
(iv) Rule 8 - Income from growing and manufacturing of tea - This
rule applies only in cases where the assessee himself grows tea
leaves and manufactures tea in India. In such cases 40% profits on
sale is taxable as business income under the head “Profits and
gains from business or profession”, and the balance 60% is
agricultural income and is exempt.
Rule Apportionment of Agricultural Business
income in certain cases Income Income
7A Income from sale of rubber 65% 35%
products derived from
rubber plant grown by the
seller in India.
7B Income from sale of coffee
- grown and cured by 75% 25%
the seller in India
- grown, cured, roasted 60% 40%
and grounded by the
seller in India
8 Income from sale of tea 60% 40%
grown and manufactured
by the seller in India
(3) Income from farm building: Income from the farm building which is owned
and occupied by the receiver of the rent or revenue of any such land or
occupied by the cultivator or the receiver of rent in kind, of any land with
respect to which, or the produce of which, any process discussed above is
carried on, would be agricultural income.
However, the income arising from the use of such farm building for any
purpose (including letting for residential purpose or for the purpose of
business or profession) other than agriculture referred in (1) & (2) of para 3.6
in pages 1.36 & 1.37 would not be agricultural income.
Further, the income from such farm building would be agricultural income
only if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) The building should be on or in the immediate vicinity of the land; and
(b) The receiver of the rent or revenue or the cultivator or the receiver of
rent in kind should, by reason of his connection with such land require
it as a dwelling house or as a store house.
INCOME TAX LAW
In addition to the above conditions any one of the following two conditions
should also be satisfied:
(i) The land should either be assessed to land revenue in India or be
subject to a local rate assessed and collected by the officers of the
Government as such or;
(ii) Where the land is not so assessed to land revenue in India or is not
subject to local rate:-
a. It should not be situated in any area as comprised within the
jurisdiction of a municipality or a cantonment board and which
has a population not less than 10,000 or
b. It should not be situated in any area within such distance,
measured aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown
hereunder –
Shortest aerial Population according to the
distance from the local last preceding census of which
limits of a municipality the relevant figures have been
or cantonment board published before the first day
referred to in item a. of the previous year
(i) ≤ 2 kms > 10,000
(ii) >2 kms but ≤ 6 kms > 1,00,000
(iii) >6 kms but ≤ 8kms > 10,00,000
Example:
Area Shortest aerial Population according Would
distance from to the last preceding income
the local limits of census of which the derived from
a municipality or relevant figures have farm
cantonment been published building
board referred to before the first day of situated in
in item a. the previous year this area be
treated as
agricultural
income?
(i) A 1 km 9,000 Yes
(ii) B 1.5 kms 12,000 No
(iii) C 2 kms 11,00,000 No
(iv) D 3 kms 80,000 Yes
(v) E 4 kms 3,00,000 No
(v) F 5 kms 12,00,000 No
(vi) G 6 kms 8,000 Yes
(vii) H 7 kms 4,00,000 Yes
(viii) I 8 kms 10,50,000 No
(ix) J 9 kms 15,00,000 Yes
Would income arising from transfer of agricultural land situated in urban
area be agricultural income?
No, as per Explanation 1 to section 2(1A), the capital gains arising from the
transfer of urban agricultural land would not be treated as agricultural income
under section 10 but will be taxable under section 45.
Example: Suppose A sells agricultural land situated in New Delhi for ` 10 lakhs and
makes a surplus of ` 8 lakhs over its cost of acquisition. This surplus will not constitute
agricultural income exempt under section 10(1) and will be taxable under section 45.
Indirect connection with land
We have seen above that agricultural income is exempt, whether it is received
by the tiller or the landlord. However, non-agricultural income does not become
agricultural merely on account of its indirect connection with the land. The
following examples will illustrate the above point.
Example: A rural society has as its principal business the selling on behalf of its
member societies, butter made by these societies from cream sold to them by
farmers. The making of butter was a factory process separated from the farm.
The butter resulting from the factory operations separated from the farm was not an
agricultural product and the society was, therefore, not entitled to exemption under
section 10(1) in respect of such income.
Example: X was the managing agent of a company. He was entitled for a
commission at the rate of 10% p.a. on the annual net profits of the company. A part
of the company’s income was agricultural income. X claimed that since his
remuneration was calculated with reference to income of the company, part of
INCOME TAX LAW
which was agricultural income, such part of the commission as was proportionate
to the agricultural income was exempt from income tax.
Since X received remuneration under a contract for personal service calculated on
the amount of profits earned by the company; such remuneration does not constitute
agricultural income.
Example: Y owned 100 acres of agricultural land, a part of which was used as
pasture for cows. The lands were purely maintained for manuring and other
purposes connected with agriculture and only the surplus milk after satisfying the
assessee’s needs was sold. The question arose whether income from such sale of
milk was agricultural income.
The regularity with which the sales of milk were effected and quantity of milk sold
showed that the assessee carried on regular business of producing milk and selling it
as a commercial proposition. Hence, it was not agricultural income.
Example: In regard to forest trees of spontaneous growth which grow on the soil
unaided by any human skill and labour there is no cultivation of the soil at all. Even
though operations in the nature of forestry operations performed by the assessee
may have the effect of nursing and fostering the growth of such forest trees, it
cannot constitute agricultural operations.
Income from the sale of such forest trees of spontaneous growth does not, therefore,
constitute agricultural income.
Examples of Agricultural income and Non-agricultural income
For better understanding of the concept, certain examples of agricultural income
and non-agricultural income are given below:
Example: Agricultural income
 Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery.
 Income from growing of flowers and creepers.
 Rent received from land used for grazing of cattle required for agricultural
activities.
 Income from growing of bamboo.
Example: Non-agricultural income
 Income from breeding of livestock.
 Income from poultry farming.
 Income from fisheries.
 Income from dairy farming.
4. PREVIOUS YEAR AND ASSESSMENT YEAR
Previous Year 2024-25 Assessment Year 2025-26
4.1 Assessment year
The term has been defined under section 2(9). This means a period of 12 months
commencing on 1st April every year. The year in which income is earned is the
previous year and such income is taxable in the immediately following year which
is the assessment year. Income earned in the previous year 2024-25 is taxable in
the assessment year 2025-26.
Assessment year always starts from 1st April and it is always a period of 12 months.
4.2 Previous year
The term has been defined under section 3. It means the financial year immediately
preceding the assessment year. As mentioned earlier, the income earned during
the previous year is taxable in the assessment year.
Business or profession newly set up during the financial year - In such a case,
the previous year shall be the period beginning on the date of setting up of the
business or profession and ending with 31st March of the said financial year.
If a source of income comes into existence in the said financial year, then, the
previous year will commence from the date on which the source of income newly
comes into existence and will end with 31st March of the financial year.
Examples:
A is running a business from 1993 onwards. Determine the previous year for the
assessment year 2025-26.
Ans. The previous year will be 1.4.2024 to 31.3.2025.
INCOME TAX LAW
A chartered accountant sets up his profession on 1st July, 2024. Determine the
previous year for the assessment year 2025-26.
Ans. The previous year will be from 1.7.2024 to 31.3.2025.
4.3 Certain cases when income of a previous year will be
assessed in the previous year itself
General Rule
Income of a previous year is assessed in the assessment year following
the previous year
Exceptions to this rule
Cases where income of a previous year is assessed in the previous year itself
Shipping Persons AOP/ BOI/ Artificial Persons likely
business of leaving Juridical Person to transfer Discontinued
non-resident India formed for a property to business
particular event or avoid tax
purpose
The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the
assessment year following the previous year. For instance, income of previous year
2024-25 is assessed during 2025-26. Therefore, 2025-26 is the assessment year for
assessment of income of the previous year 2024-25.
However, in a few cases, this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the
previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions have been made to protect
the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as follows:
(i) Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172]
Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries passengers,
livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship is allowed to leave the
port only when the tax has been paid or satisfactory arrangement has been made
for payment thereof. 7.5% of the freight paid or payable to the owner or the
charterer or to any person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on
account of such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the
same year in which it is earned.
(ii) Persons leaving India [Section 174]
Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave India during
the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and he has no present
intention of returning to India, the total income of such individual for the period
from the expiry of the respective previous year up to the probable date of his
departure from India is chargeable to tax in that assessment year.
Example: Suppose Mr. X is leaving India for USA on 10.6.2024 and it appears to the
Assessing Officer that he has no intention to return. Before leaving India, Mr. X may
be asked to pay income-tax on the income earned during the P.Y. 2023-24 as well as
on the total income earned during the period 1.4.2024 to 10.06.2024.
(iii) AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or
purpose [Section 174A]
If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or purpose and
the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is likely to be dissolved in the
same year or in the next year, he can make assessment of the income up to the
date of dissolution as income of the relevant assessment year.
(iv) Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175]
During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing Officer that a
person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or otherwise part with any of his
assets to avoid payment of any liability under this Act, the total income of such
person for the period from the expiry of the previous year to the date, when the
Assessing Officer commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax
in that assessment year.
(v) Discontinued business [Section 176]
Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment year, the
income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up to the date of such
discontinuance may, at the discretion of the Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in
that assessment year.
INCOME TAX LAW
5. UNDISCLOSED SOURCES OF INCOME
Amount
borrowed or
repaid on hundi
Cash [Section 69D]
Unexplained
Credits
expenditure
[Section
[Section 69C]
68]
Undisclosed
sources of
income
Unexplained Investment etc.
Investments not fully
[Section 69] disclosed
[Section 69B]
Unexplained
money
[Section 69A]
(i) Cash Credits [Section 68]
Where any sum is found credited in the books of an assessee maintained for any
previous year and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source
or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer,
the sum so credited may be charged as income of the assessee of that previous
year.
Unexplained loan or borrowing - Where the sum so credited consists of loan or
borrowing or any such amount, by whatever name called, any explanation offered
by the assessee in whose books such sum is credited shall not be deemed to be
satisfactory, unless -
- the person in whose name such credit is recorded in the books of such
assessee also offers an explanation about the nature and source of such sum
so credited; and
- such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to
be satisfactory.
Unexplained Share Capital/ Premium- Any explanation offered by a closely held
company in respect of any sum credited as share application money, share capital,
share premium or any such amount, by whatever name called, in the accounts of
such company shall be deemed to be not satisfactory, unless
- the person, being a resident, in whose name such credit is recorded in the
books of such company also explains about the nature and the source of such
sum so credited and
- such explanation in the opinion of the Assessing Officer has been found to
be satisfactory
Non-applicability to Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company –These
additional conditions would not apply if the person, in whose name the sum is
recorded, is a Venture Capital Fund or Venture Capital Company registered with
SEBI.
(ii) Unexplained Investments [Section 69]
Where in the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year, the
assessee has made investments which are not recorded in the books of account
and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and the source of
investments or the explanation offered is not satisfactory in the opinion of the
Assessing Officer, the value of the investments are taxed as deemed income of the
assessee of such financial year.
(iii) Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A]
Where in any financial year the assessee is found to be the owner of any money,
bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the same is not recorded in the books
of account and the assessee offers no explanation about the nature and source of
acquisition of such money, bullion etc. or the explanation offered is not satisfactory
in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, the money and the value of bullion etc. may
be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year.
(iv) Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account
[Section 69B]
Where in any financial year the assessee has made investments or is found to be
the owner of any bullion, jewellery or other valuable article and the Assessing
Officer finds that the amount spent on making such investments or in acquiring
such articles exceeds the amount recorded in the books of account maintained by
the assessee and he offers no explanation for the difference or the explanation
INCOME TAX LAW
offered is unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, such excess may
be deemed to be the income of the assessee for such financial year.
Example:
If the assessee is found to be the owner of say 300 gms of gold (market value of which
is ` 25,000) during the financial year ending 31.3.2025 but he has recorded to have
spent ` 15,000 in acquiring it, the Assessing Officer can add ` 10,000 (i.e., the
difference of the market value of such gold and ` 15,000) as the income of the
assessee, if the assessee offers no satisfactory explanation thereof.
(v) Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C]
Where in any financial year an assessee has incurred any expenditure and he offers
no explanation about the source of such expenditure or the explanation is
unsatisfactory in the opinion of the Assessing Officer, Assessing Officer can treat
such unexplained expenditure as the income of the assessee for such financial year.
Such unexplained expenditure which is deemed to be the income of the assessee
shall not be allowed as deduction under any head of income.
(vi) Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D]
Where any amount is borrowed on a hundi or any amount due thereon is repaid other
than through an account-payee cheque drawn on a bank, the amount so borrowed or
repaid shall be deemed to be the income of the person borrowing or repaying for the
previous year in which the amount was borrowed or repaid, as the case may be.
However, where any amount borrowed on a hundi has been deemed to be the
income of any person, he will not be again liable to be assessed in respect of such
amount on repayment of such amount. The amount repaid shall include interest
paid on the amount borrowed.
6. RATES OF TAX, SURCHARGE & CESS
Income-tax
Income-tax is to be charged on every person at the rates prescribed for the year by
the Annual Finance Act or the Income-tax Act, 1961 or both.
Surcharge
Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-tax. Surcharge
is levied as a percentage of income-tax. Surcharge is presently being levied beyond
a particular threshold of income for different persons. Also, higher rates of
surcharge are prescribed for higher thresholds of income. However, under the
special tax regimes for domestic companies and co-operative societies, a uniform
surcharge is prescribed irrespective of the level of total income.
“Health and Education cess” on Income-tax
The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable,
should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the “Health and
Education cess on income-tax”, calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax and
surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of all
assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOPs/BOIs, Artificial Juridical Persons, firms, local
authorities, co-operative societies and companies.
It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance
quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary and
higher education.
6.1 Individual/Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/Association of
Persons (AOP)/Body of Individuals (BOI)/Artificial
Juridical Person
Income-tax
Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI and Artificial Juridical Persons can pay tax at concessional
rates under the default tax regime under section 115BAC. However, he/it has to
forego certain exemptions and deductions under this regime. Alternatively, he/it
can exercise the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax under the
optional tax regime as per the regular provisions of the Act at the tax rates
prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year.
Default tax regime under section 115BAC of the Income-tax Act, 1961
I. Concessional tax rates
Individuals/ HUF/ AoPs/ BoIs or artificial judicial persons, other than those who
exercise the option to opt out this regime under section 115BAC(6), have to pay tax
in respect of their total income (other than income chargeable to tax at special
rates under Chapter XII such as section 111A, 112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ etc.) at the
following concessional rates, subject to certain conditions specified under section
115BAC(2) –
INCOME TAX LAW
(i) Upto ` 3,00,000 NIL
(ii) From ` 3,00,001 to ` 7,00,000 5%
(iii) From ` 7,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 10%
(iv) From ` 10,00,001 to ` 12,00,000 15%
(v) From ` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000 20%
(vii) Above ` 15,00,000 30%
II. Conditions to be satisfied
The following are the conditions to be satisfied:
S. Particulars
No.
(1) Certain deductions/exemptions not allowable: Section 115BAC(2)
provides that while computing total income, the following
deductions/exemptions would not be allowed:
Section Exemption/Deduction
10(5) Leave travel concession
10(13A) House rent allowance
10(14) Exemption in respect of special allowances or
benefit to meet expenses relating to duties or
personal expenses (other than those as may be
prescribed for this purpose)
10(17) Daily allowance or constituency allowance of MPs
and MLAs
10(32) Exemption in respect of income of minor child
included in the income of parent
10AA Tax holiday for units established in SEZ
16 (i) Entertainment allowance
(ii) Professional tax
24(b) Interest on loan in respect of self-occupied property
32(1)(iia) Additional depreciation
35(1)(ii),(iia),(iii) Deduction in respect of contribution to
or 35(2AA) - notified approved research association/
university/college/other institutions for scientific
research [Section 35(1)(ii)]
- approved Indian company for scientific research
[Section 35(1)(iia)]
- notified approved research association/
university/college/other institutions for research
in social science or statistical research [Section
35(1)(iii)]
- An approved National laboratory/university/IIT/
specified person for scientific research
undertaken under an approved programme
[Section 35(2AA)]
35AD Investment linked tax incentives for specified
businesses
80C to 80U Deductions under Chapter VI-A (other than
employers contribution towards NPS under section
80CCD(2), Central Government contribution
towards Agnipath Scheme under section 80CCH(2)
and deduction in respect of employment of new
employees under section 80JJAA).
(2) Certain losses not allowed to be set-off: While computing total
income, set-off of any loss -
(i) carried forward or depreciation from any earlier assessment year,
if such loss or depreciation is attributable to any of the deductions
referred to in (1) above; or
(ii) under the head house property with any other head of income;
would not be allowed.
(3) Depreciation or additional depreciation: Depreciation u/s 32 is to be
determined in the prescribed manner. Depreciation in respect of any
block of assets entitled to more than 40%, would be restricted to 40%
on the written down value of such block of assets. Additional
depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), however, cannot be claimed.
(4) Exemption or deduction for allowances or perquisite: While
computing total income, any exemption or deduction for allowances or
INCOME TAX LAW
perquisite, by whatever name called, provided under any other law for
the time being force in India would not be allowed.
Additional points:
Loss or depreciation referred to in (2) above would be deemed to have been already
given effect to and no further deduction for such loss or depreciation shall be
allowed for any subsequent year.
Where income-tax on total income of the assessee is computed under this section
and there is a depreciation allowance in respect of a block of asset from an earlier
assessment year attributable to additional depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), which has
not been given full effect to prior to A.Y. 2024-25 and which is not allowed to be
set-off in the A.Y.2024-25 due to section 115BAC, corresponding adjustment shall
be made to the WDV of such block of assets as on 1.4.2023 in the prescribed
manner i.e., the WDV as on 1.4.2023 will be increased by the unabsorbed
additional depreciation not allowed to be set-off.
III. Time limit for exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime
(i) In case of an assessee having no income from business or profession:
Where such individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person is not
having income from business or profession, he/it can exercise an option to
shift out/opt out of the default tax regime under this section and such option
has to be exercised along with the return of income to be furnished
under section 139(1) for a previous year relevant to the assessment year. In
effect, such individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person can choose
whether or not to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
in each previous year. He/it may choose to pay tax under default tax regime
under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of
default tax regime in another year.
(ii) In case of an assessee having income from business or profession: Such
individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person having income from
business or profession has an option to shift out/ opt out of the default tax
regime under this section and the option has to be exercised on or before
the due date specified under section 139(1) for furnishing the return of
income for such previous year and once such option is exercised, it would
apply to subsequent assessment years.
Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default
tax regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only
once and pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC for a
previous year other than the year in which it was exercised.
Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this
section, except where such person ceases to have any business or
professional income in which case, option under (i) above would be available.
AMT liability not attracted: Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical person
paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC is not liable to alternate
minimum tax u/s 115JC. Such person would not be eligible to claim AMT credit also.
Note: It may be noted that in case of Individual/HUF/AoP/BoI or Artificial Juridical
person not having income from business or profession, the total income and tax
liability (including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable under normal provisions)
may be computed every year both in accordance with the regular provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 and in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC, in
order to determine which is more beneficial and accordingly such person may decide
whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC or exercise the
option to shift out and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act for that year.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2024-25, comprising of income from
house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for
A.Y.2025-26 under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y. 2025-26
Tax liability:
First ` 3,00,000 - Nil
Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 7,00,000 - @5% of ` 4,00,000 = ` 20,000
Next ` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 - @10% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 30,000
Next ` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 - @15% of ` 2,00,000 = ` 30,000
Next ` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 - @20% of ` 3,00,000 = ` 60,000
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 15,00,000 - @30% of ` 1,00,000 = ` 30,000
= ` 1,70,000
Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 6,800
= ` 1,76,800
INCOME TAX LAW
Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act for optional tax regime
The slab rates for A.Y. 2025-26 applicable to an Individual/HUF/AOP/BOI/ Artificial
Juridical Person, which has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime, are as follows:
(i) where the total income does NIL
not exceed ` 2,50,000
(ii) where the total income 5% of the amount by which the total
exceeds ` 2,50,000 but does income exceeds ` 2,50,000
not exceed ` 5,00,000
(iii) where the total income ` 12,500 plus 20% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000
not exceed ` 10,00,000
(iv) where the total income ` 1,12,500 plus 30% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 10,00,000 the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000
For a senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or
more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000
and for a very senior citizen (being a resident individual who is of the age of 80
years or more at any time during the previous year), the basic exemption limit is
` 5,00,000. Therefore, the tax slabs for these assessees would be as follows –
For senior citizens (being resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more
but less than 80 years)
(i) where the total income does NIL
not exceed ` 3,00,000
(ii) where the total income 5% of the amount by which the total
exceeds ` 3,00,000 but does income exceeds ` 3,00,000
not exceed ` 5,00,000
(iii) where the total income ` 10,000 plus 20% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does the total income exceeds ` 5,00,000
not exceed ` 10,00,000
(iv) where the total income ` 1,10,000 plus 30% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 10,00,000 the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000
For resident individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the
previous year
(i) where the total income does NIL
not exceed ` 5,00,000
(ii) where the total income 20% of the amount by which the total
exceeds ` 5,00,000 but does income exceeds ` 5,00,000
not exceed ` 10,00,000
(iii) where the total income ` 1,00,000 plus 30% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 10,00,000 the total income exceeds ` 10,00,000
Clarification regarding attaining prescribed age of 60 years/ 80 years on
31st March itself, in case of senior/very senior citizens whose date of birth
falls on 1st April [Circular No. 28/2016, dated 27-07-2016]
The CBDT has clarified that a person born on 1st April would be considered to have
attained a particular age on 31st March, the day preceding the anniversary of his
birthday. In particular, the question of attainment of age of eligibility for being
considered a senior/very senior citizen would be decided on the basis of above
criteria.
Therefore, a resident individual whose 60th birthday falls on 1st April, 2025, would
be treated as having attained the age of 60 years in the P.Y.2024-25 and would be
eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 3 lakh while computing his tax liability
for A.Y.2025-26 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the
Act. Likewise, a resident individual whose 80th birthday falls on 1st April, 2025, would
be treated as having attained the age of 80 years in the P.Y.2024-25, and would be
eligible for higher basic exemption limit of ` 5 lakh in computing his tax liability for
A.Y.2025-26 under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
In respect of certain types of income, as mentioned below, the Income-tax Act,
1961 has prescribed specific rates. The special rates of tax have to be applied on
the respective component of total income irrespective of the tax regime and the
slab rates have to be applied on the balance of total income after adjusting the
basic exemption limit.
INCOME TAX LAW
S. Section Income Rate of Tax
No.
(a) 112 (I) Long term capital gains (other than LTCG
taxable as per section 112A and mentioned in
(II) below) arising -
(a) from transfer of capital asset which takes 20% with
place before 23.7.2024 indexation
(b) from transfer of capital asset which takes
place on or after 23.7.2024
- from transfer of any land or building Lower of 20% with
or both by an individual or a HUF, indexation or
being a resident acquired before 12.5% without
23.7.2024 indexation
- from transfer of other capital asset 12.5% without
indexation
(II) Long-term capital gains arising from transfer
of unlisted securities or shares of company in
which public are not substantially interested by
non-resident assessee
- If transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 10% without
indexation and
foreign currency
fluctuations
- If transfer takes place on or after 12.5% without
23.7.2024 indexation and
foreign currency
fluctuations
(b) 112A Long term capital gains on transfer of – 10% on LTCG >
• Equity share in a company ` 1.25 lakhs if
transfer takes
• Unit of an equity oriented fund
place before
• Unit of business trust
23.7.2024
Condition for availing the benefit of this
12.5% on LTCG >
concessional rate is that securities transaction
` 1.25 lakhs if
tax (STT) should have been paid –
transfer takes
place on or after
23.7.2024
In case of Time of Note: Total
payment of STT exemption in a
P.Y. cannot
Equity shares both at the time
exceed ` 1.25
of acquisition
lakhs.
and transfer
Unit of equity oriented at the time of
fund or unit of business transfer
trust
(c) 111A Short-term capital gains on transfer of – 15% if transfer
• Equity shares in a company takes place before
23.7.2024
• Unit of an equity oriented fund
• Unit of business trust
20% if transfer
The conditions for availing the benefit of this
takes place on or
concessional rate are –
after 23.7.2024
(i) the transaction of sale of such equity
share or unit should be entered into on or
after 1.10.2004; and
(ii) such transaction should be chargeable
STT.
(d) 115BB Winnings from 30%
• Lotteries;
• Crossword puzzles;
• Races including horse races;
• Card games and other games of any sort;
• Gambling or betting of any form or
nature
(other than winning from any online game)
(e) 115BBJ Net winnings from online games 30%
(f) 115BBE Unexplained money, investment, expenditure, 60%
etc. deemed as income under section 68 or
section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or
section 69C or section 69D [See discussion
below]
Note – For detailed discussion on taxability of capital gains, please refer Unit 4: Capital
Gains of Chapter 3: Heads of Income.
INCOME TAX LAW
Unexplained money, investments etc. to attract tax@60% [Section 115BBE]
(i) In order to control laundering of unaccounted money by availing the benefit
of basic exemption limit, the unexplained money, investment, expenditure,
etc. deemed as income under section 68 or section 69 or section 69A or
section 69B or section 69C or section 69D would be taxed at the rate of 60%
plus surcharge @25% of tax. Thus, the effective rate of tax (including
surcharge@25% of tax and cess@4% of tax and surcharge) is 78%.
(ii) No basic exemption or allowance or expenditure shall be allowed to the
assessee under any provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in computing such
deemed income.
(iii) Further, no set off of any loss shall be allowable against income brought to
tax under sections 68 or section 69 or section 69A or section 69B or section
69C or section 69D.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. X has a total income of ` 16,00,000 for P.Y.2024-25, comprising of income from
house property and interest on fixed deposits. Compute his tax liability for
A.Y.2025-26 assuming his age is –
(a) 45 years
(b) 63 years
(c) 82 years
Assume that Mr. X has exercised the option to shift out/ opt out of the default tax regime.
SOLUTION
(a) Computation of tax liability of Mr. X (aged 45 years)
Tax liability:
First ` 2,50,000 - Nil
Next ` 2,50,001 – ` 5,00,000 - @5% of ` 2,50,000 = ` 12,500
Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 - @20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000
= ` 2,92,500
Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 11,700
= ` 3,04,200
(b) Computation of tax liability of Mr. X (aged 63 years)
Tax liability:
First ` 3,00,000 - Nil
Next ` 3,00,001 – ` 5,00,000 - @5% of ` 2,00,000 = ` 10,000
Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 - @20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000
= ` 2,90,000
Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 11,600
= ` 3,01,600
(c) Computation of tax liability of Mr. X (aged 82 years)
Tax liability:
First ` 5,00,000 - Nil
Next ` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 - @ 20% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 1,00,000
Balance i.e., ` 16,00,000 minus ` 10,00,000- @ 30% of ` 6,00,000 = ` 1,80,000
=` 2,80,000
Add: Health and Education cess@4% = ` 11,200
=` 2,91,200
Surcharge
In case the Individual/HUF/AoP6/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person pays tax
under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Income-tax computed in accordance with the provisions of section 115BAC and/ or
section 111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be
increased by surcharge given under the following table:
6 (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members)
INCOME TAX LAW
Rate of Example
Particulars surcharge
Components of Applicable rate
on income-
total income of surcharge
tax
(i) Where the total 10% Example
income (including
• Dividend ` 15 Surcharge would
dividend income
lakhs; be levied@10%
and capital gains
• STCG u/s 111A on income-tax
chargeable to tax
` 15 lakhs; computed on
u/s 111A, 112 and
total income of
112A) > ` 50 lakhs • LTCG u/s 112
` 1 crore.
but ≤ ` 1 crore ` 25 lakhs;
• LTCG u/s 112A
` 20 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 25 lakhs
(ii) Where total income 15% Example
(including dividend
• Dividend income Surcharge would
income and capital
` 10 lakhs; be levied@15%
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A on income-tax
tax u/s 111A, 112
and 112A) > ` 1 ` 35 lakhs; computed on
total income of
crore but ≤ ` 2 • LTCG u/s 112
` 1.85 crores.
crore ` 50 lakhs;
• LTCG u/s 112A
` 35 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 55 lakhs
(iii) Where total income 25% Example
(excluding dividend
• Dividend income Surcharge@15%
income and capital
` 51 lakhs; would be levied
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A on income-tax
tax u/s 111A, 112 and
112A) > ` 2 crore ` 44 lakh; on:
• LTCG u/s 112 • Dividend
` 42 lakhs; income of ` 51
lakhs;
The rate of Not • LTCG u/s 112A • STCG of ` 44
surcharge on the exceeding ` 55 lakh; and lakhs
income-tax 15% • Other income chargeable to
payable on the ` 6 crores tax u/s 111A;
portion of dividend • LTCG of ` 42
income and capital lakhs
gains chargeable to chargeable to
tax u/s 111A, 112 tax u/s 112;
and 112A and
• LTCG of ` 55
lakhs
chargeable to
tax u/s 112A.
Surcharge@25%
would be leviable
on income-tax
computed on
other income of
` 6 crores
included in total
income
(iv) Where total income 15% Example
(including dividend
• Dividend income Surcharge would
income and capital
` 40 lakhs; be levied@15%
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A on income-tax
tax u/s 111A, 112
and 112A) > ` 2 ` 35 lakhs; computed on
total income of
crore in cases not • LTCG u/s 112 ` 42
` 2.77 crore.
covered under (iii) lakhs;
above • LTCG u/s 112A
` 50 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 1.10 crore
Marginal relief
The purpose of marginal relief is to ensure that the increase in amount of tax
payable (including surcharge) due to increase in total income of an assessee
INCOME TAX LAW
beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the amount of increase in total
income.
Marginal relief is available in case of such persons paying tax under default tax
regime u/s 115BAC referred to in above i.e., -
Particulars Marginal relief
(i) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 50 lakhs add surcharge@10% on such income-tax (A)
but ≤ ` 1 crore Step 2 - Compute income-tax on ` 50 lakhs
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (B)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B).
Consequently, if A>B, the marginal relief would be
A – B.
(ii) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 1 crore add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C)
but ≤ ` 2 crores Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 1 crore
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (D)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., C) or Step 4 (i.e., D).
Consequently, if C>D, the marginal relief would be
C – D.
(iii) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 2 crores add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E)
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15%
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 2 crore
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (F)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F).
Consequently, if E>F, the marginal relief would be
E – F.
Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include
dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and
short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A.
In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable
under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A,
surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains
cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in
cases referred to in (iii) above.
In case the Individual/HUF/AoP7/BoI and Artificial Juridical Person exercises
the option to shift out of the default tax regime
Income-tax computed in accordance with normal provisions of the Act or section
111A or section 112 or section 112A or 115BBE or section 115BBJ would be
increased by surcharge given under the following table:
Rate of Example
Particulars surcharge Components of Applicable rate of
on income-
total income surcharge
tax
(i) Where the total 10% Example
income (including • Dividend ` 10 Surcharge would
dividend income lakhs; be levied@10% on
and capital gains • STCG u/s 111A income-tax
chargeable to tax ` 20 lakhs; computed on total
u/s 111A, 112 and • LTCG u/s 112 income of ` 90
112A) > ` 50 lakhs ` 15 lakhs; lakhs.
but ≤ ` 1 crore • LTCG u/s 112A
` 20 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 25 lakhs
7 (other than an AOP consisting of only companies as members)
INCOME TAX LAW
(ii) Where total income 15% Example
(including dividend
• Dividend income Surcharge would be
income and capital
` 10 lakhs; levied@15% on
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A income-tax
tax u/s 111A, 112
` 40 lakhs; computed on total
and 112A) > ` 1
income of ` 1.90
crore but ≤ ` 2 crore • LTCG u/s 112
crores.
` 55 lakhs;
• LTCG u/s 112A
` 35 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 50 lakhs
(iii) Where total income 25% Example
(excluding dividend
• Dividend income Surcharge@15%
income and capital
` 51 lakhs; would be levied on
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A income-tax on:
tax u/s 111A, 112 and
` 44 lakh; • Dividend
112A) > ` 2 crore but
≤ ` 5 crore • LTCG u/s 112 income of ` 51
` 42 lakhs; lakhs;
The rate of Not
• LTCG u/s 112A • STCG of ` 44
surcharge on the exceeding
` 55 lakh; and lakhs chargeable
income-tax 15%
to tax u/s 111A;
payable on the • Other income
portion of dividend ` 3 crores • LTCG of ` 42
lakhs chargeable
income and capital
to tax u/s 112;
gains chargeable to
and
tax u/s 111A, 112
and 112A • LTCG of ` 55
lakhs chargeable
to tax u/s 112A.
Surcharge@25%
would be leviable
on income-tax
computed on other
income of ` 3
crores included in
total income
(iv) Where total income 37% Example
(excluding • Dividend income Surcharge@15%
dividend income ` 60 lakhs; would be levied on
and capital gains
• STCG u/s 111A income-tax on:
chargeable to tax
` 50 lakhs; • Dividend
u/s 111A, 112 and
• LTCG u/s 112 income of ` 60
112A) > ` 5 crore
` 42 lakhs; lakhs;
Rate of surcharge Not • LTCG u/s 112A • STCG of ` 50
on the income-tax exceeding
` 25 lakhs; and lakhs chargeable
payable on the 15%
• Other income to tax u/s 111A;
portion of dividend
` 6 crore • LTCG of ` 42
income and capital
lakhs chargeable
gains chargeable to
to tax u/s 112;
tax u/s 111A, 112
and
and 112A
• LTCG of ` 25
lakhs chargeable
to tax u/s 112A.
Surcharge@37%
would be leviable on
the income-tax
computed on other
income of ` 6 crores
included in total
income.
(v) Where total income 15% Example
(including dividend • Dividend income Surcharge would
income and capital ` 55 lakhs; be levied@15% on
gains chargeable to
• STCG u/s 111A income-tax
tax u/s 111A, 112
` 60 lakhs; computed on total
and 112A) > ` 2 • LTCG u/s 112 ` 42 income of ` 3.02
crore in cases not
crore.
lakhs;
covered under (iii)
• LTCG u/s 112A
and (iv) above
` 35 lakhs; and
• Other income
` 1.10 crore
INCOME TAX LAW
Marginal relief
Marginal relief in case of such persons referred to in above under the optional tax
regime (as per the normal provisions of the Act).
Particulars Marginal relief
(i) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 50 lakhs add surcharge@10% on such income-tax (A)
but ≤ ` 1 crore
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on ` 50 lakhs
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 50 lakhs
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (B)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., A) or Step 4 (i.e., B).
Consequently, if A>B, the marginal relief would be
A – B.
(ii) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 1 crore add surcharge@15% on income-tax (C)
but ≤ ` 2 crores
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 1
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@10%
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 1 crore
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (D)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., C) or Step 4 (i.e., D).
Consequently, if C>D, the marginal relief would be
C – D.
(iii) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 2 crores add surcharge@25% on income-tax (E)
but ≤ ` 5 crores
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 2
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@15%
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 2 crore
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (F)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., E) or Step 4 (i.e., F).
Consequently, if E>F, the marginal relief would be
E – F.
(iv) Where the total Step 1 - Compute income-tax on total income; and
income > ` 5 crores add surcharge@37% on income-tax (G)
Step 2 - Compute income-tax on total income of ` 5
crore + surcharge on such income-tax@25%
Step 3 - Total income (-) ` 5 crore
Step 4 - Add the amount computed in Step 2 and Step
3 (H)
Step 5 – Income-tax liability on total income (along
with surcharge) would be the lower of the amount
arrived at in Step 1 (i.e., G) or Step 4 (i.e., H).
Consequently, if G>H, the marginal relief would be
G – H.
Note – It is presumed that the total income referred to above does not include
dividend income, long term capital gains taxable under section 112/ 112A and
short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A.
In case the total income includes dividend income, long term capital gains taxable
under section 112/ 112A or short term capital gains taxable under section 111A,
surcharge on income-tax computed on such dividend income and capital gains
cannot exceed 15%. This must be kept in mind while computing marginal relief in
cases referred to in (iii) and (iv) above.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Compute the tax liability of Mr. A (aged 42), having total income of ` 51 lakhs for the
Assessment Year 2025-26. Assume that his total income comprises of salary income,
Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. Assume that Mr. A has
exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC.
INCOME TAX LAW
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% ` 12,500
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000 @30% ` 12,30,000
Total ` 13,42,500
Add: Surcharge @ 10% ` 1,34,250 ` 14,76,750
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000) ` 13,12,500
(C) Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs ` 1,00,000
(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the
excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B +C) ` 14,12,500
(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D) ` 14,12,500
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 56,500
Tax liability (including cess) ` 14,69,000
(F) Marginal Relief (A – D) ` 64,250
Alternative method -
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 51,00,000
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000@5% ` 12,500
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 51,00,000@30% ` 12,30,000
Total ` 13,42,500
Add: Surcharge@10% ` 1,34,250 ` 14,76,750
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 50 lakhs
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 12,00,000) ` 13,12,500
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 1,64,250
(D) Marginal Relief (` 1,64,250 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 50,00,000) ` 64,250
(E) Tax liability (A)-(D) ` 14,12,500
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 56,500
Tax liability (including cess) ` 14,69,000
ILLUSTRATION 6
Compute the tax liability of Mr. B (aged 51) under the default tax regime, having total
income of ` 1,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2025-26. Assume that his total income
comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. B for the A.Y. 2025-26
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 1,01,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000@5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,01,00,000@30% ` 25,80,000
Total ` 27,20,000
Add: Surcharge@15% ` 4,08,000
Tax liability without marginal relief ` 31,28,000
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore
(` 1,40,000 plus ` 25,50,000) ` 26,90,000
Add: Surcharge@10% ` 2,69,000
` 29,59,000
(C) Total Income Less ` 1 crore ` 1,00,000
(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore plus the
excess of total income over ` 1 crore (B +C) ` 30,59,000
INCOME TAX LAW
(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) & (D) ` 30,59,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 1,22,360
Tax liability (including cess) ` 31,81,360
(F) Marginal relief (A-D) ` 69,000
Alternative method:
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 1,01,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000@5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,01,00,000@30% ` 25,80,000
Total ` 27,20,000
Add: Surcharge @ 15% ` 4,08,000 ` 31,28,000
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore
[(` 1,40,000 plus ` 25,50,000) plus surcharge@10%] ` 29,59,000
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 1,69,000
(D) Marginal Relief (` 1,69,000 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000) ` 69,000
(E) Tax liability (A) - (D) ` 30,59,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 1,22,360
Tax liability (including cess) ` 31,81,360
ILLUSTRATION 7
Compute the tax liability of Mr. C (aged 58), having total income of ` 2,01,00,000 for
the Assessment Year 2025-26. Assume that his total income comprises of salary
income, Income from house property and interest on fixed deposit. Assume that
Mr. C has exercised the option to shift out of section 115BAC.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. C for the A.Y. 2025-26
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 2,01,00,000
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% ` 12,500
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000@30% ` 57,30,000
Total ` 58,42,500
Add: Surcharge @ 25% ` 14,60,625 ` 73,03,125
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore
(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000) ` 58,12,500
Add: Surcharge@15% ` 8,71,875
` 66,84,375
(C) Total Income Less ` 2 crore ` 1,00,000
(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore plus the
excess of total income over ` 2 crore (B +C) ` 67,84,375
(E) Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower ` 67,84,375
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 2,71,375
Tax liability (including cess) ` 70,55,750
(F) Marginal relief (A-D) ` 5,18,750
Alternative method
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 2,01,00,000
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% ` 12,500
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 2,01,00,000@30% ` 57,30,000
Total ` 58,42,500
Add: Surcharge@25% ` 14,60,625 ` 73,03,125
INCOME TAX LAW
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 2 crore
[(` 12,500 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 57,00,000)
plus surcharge@15%] ` 66,84,375
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 6,18,750
(D) Marginal Relief (` 6,18,750 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 2,00,00,000) ` 5,18,750
(E) Tax liability (A) - (D) ` 67,84,375
Add: Health and education cess@4% ` 2,71,375
Tax liability (including cess) ` 70,55,750
ILLUSTRATION 8
Compute the tax liability of Mr. D (aged 65) in a most beneficial manner. He is having
total income of ` 5,01,00,000 for the Assessment Year 2025-26. Assume that his total
income comprises of salary income, Income from house property and interest on fixed
deposit and is the same under both tax regimes.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under default tax regime
for the A.Y. 2025-26
Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of ` 5,01,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000@5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000@15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000@20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% ` 1,45,80,000
Total ` 1,47,20,000
Add: Surcharge@25% ` 36,80,000
` 1,84,00,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 7,36,000
Tax liability ` 1,91,36,000
Computation of tax liability of Mr. D under optional tax regime
for the A.Y. 2025-26
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 5,01,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000 @ 5% ` 10,000
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @ 20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% ` 1,47,30,000
Total ` 1,48,40,000
Add: Surcharge @ 37% ` 54,90,800 ` 2,03,30,800
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore
(` 10,000 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 1,47,00,000) ` 1,48,10,000
Add: Surcharge@25% ` 37,02,500
` 1,85,12,500
(C) Total Income Less ` 5 crore ` 1,00,000
(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore plus the
excess of total income over ` 5 crore (B +C) ` 1,86,12,500
(E) Tax liability (A) or (D), whichever is lower ` 1,86,12,500
Add: Health and education cess@4% ` 7,44,500
Tax liability (including cess) ` 1,93,57,000
(F) Marginal Relief (A – D) ` 17,18,300
Alternative method
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 5,01,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000@5% ` 10,000
` 5,00,001 – ` 10,00,000@20% ` 1,00,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 5,01,00,000@30% ` 1,47,30,000
Total ` 1,48,40,000
Add: Surcharge @ 37% ` 54,90,800 ` 2,03,30,800
INCOME TAX LAW
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 5 crore
[(` 10,000 plus ` 1,00,000 plus ` 1,47,00,000)
plus surcharge@25%] ` 1,85,12,500
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 18,18,300
(D) Marginal Relief (` 18,18,300 – ` 1,00,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 5,00,00,000) ` 17,18,300
(E) Tax liability (A) - (D) ` 1,86,12,500
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 7,44,500
Tax liability (including cess) ` 1,93,57,000
It is beneficial for Mr. D to pay tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC,
since his tax liability would be lower by ` 2,21,000 (` 1,93,57,000 - ` 1,91,36,000).
6.2 Firm/ LLP/ Local Authority
Income-tax
On the whole of the total income 30%
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be
applicable to Firm/ LLP/ local authority also.
Surcharge
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of 12%
of income-tax computed as above.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such persons having a total income exceeding
` 1 crore i.e., the total amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed
on such income should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total
income of ` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.
6.3 Co-operative Society
Income-tax rates as per the normal provisions of the Act
(i) Where the total income does 10% of the total income
not exceed ` 10,000
(ii) Where the total income ` 1,000 plus 20% of the amount by which
exceeds ` 10,000 but does not the total income exceeds ` 10,000
exceed ` 20,000
(iii) Where the total income 3,000 plus 30% of the amount by which the
exceeds ` 20,000 total income exceeds ` 20,000
Note – A manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for
concessional rates of tax under section 115BAE and other co-operative societies,
resident in India, can opt for concessional rates of tax under section 115BAD.
Tax rate in case of a manufacturing co-operative society, resident in India (set
up and registered on or after 1.4.2023 and commences manufacture of article
or thing before 31.3.2024) opting for concessional tax regime u/s 115BAE
15% of income derived from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an
article or thing
Tax rate in case of other resident co-operative society opting for concessional
tax regime u/s 115BAD:
22% of total income
Note - Co-operative society, resident in India, can opt for concessional rate of tax
u/s 115BAD or 115BAE, as the case may be, subject to certain conditions. The total
income of such co-operative societies would be computed without giving effect to
deduction under section 10AA, 33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35AD,
35CCC, additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia), deductions under Chapter
VI-A (other than section 80JJAA) etc. and set off of loss and depreciation brought
forward from earlier years relating to the above deductions. The provisions of
alternate minimum tax under section 115JC would not be applicable to a co-
operative society opting for section 115BAD or 115BAE. This section will be dealt
with in detail at Final level.
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be
applicable to Co-operative society also.
INCOME TAX LAW
Surcharge
(a) In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society
opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income >
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore,
surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance
with the slab rates given above and/ or section 111A or section 112 or section
112A.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i.e., the total
amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income
should not exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of
` 1 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.
(b) In case of a co-operative society (other than a co-operative society
opting for section 115BAD or section 115BAE), whose total income is >
` 10 crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate of
12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the slab rates given above
and/ or section 111A or section 112 or section 112A.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such co-operative societies i. e., the total
amount of income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income
should not exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on
total income of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds
` 10 crore.
(c) In case of a co-operative society opting for section 115BAD or section
115BAE
Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAD or section
115BAE would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability of
surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief.
6.4 Domestic Company
Income-tax
If the total turnover or gross receipt in the 25% of the total income
P.Y.2022-23 ≤ ` 400 crore
In any other case 30% of the total income
Notes –
• In case of a domestic manufacturing company (set up and registered
on or after 1.10.2019 and commences manufacture of article or thing8
before 31.3.2024) exercising option u/s 115BAB: 15% of income derived
from or incidental to manufacturing or production of an article or thing
• In case of a domestic company exercising option u/s 115BAA: 22% of
total income
Domestic company can opt for section 115BAA or section 115BAB, as the case
may be, subject to certain conditions. The total income of such companies
would be computed without giving effect to deductions under section 10AA,
33AB, 33ABA, 35(1)(ii)/(iia)/(iii), 35(2AA), 35(2AB), 35AD, 35CCC, 35CCD, Chapter
VI-A (except section 80JJAA or section 80M), additional depreciation under
section 32(1)(iia) etc. and without set-off of brought forward loss and
unabsorbed depreciation attributable to such deductions. These sections will be
dealt with in detail at Final Level.
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be
applicable to domestic company also.
Surcharge
(a) In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting
for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income > ` 1 crore
but is ≤ ` 10 crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore,
surcharge is payable at the rate of 7% of income-tax computed in accordance
with the rates given above.
8Including business of generation of electricity
INCOME TAX LAW
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not
exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by
more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.
(b) In case of a domestic company (other than a domestic company opting
for section 115BAA or section 115BAB), whose total income is > ` 10
crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate
of 12% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not
exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income
of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore.
(c) In case of a domestic company opting for section 115BAA or section
115BAB
Surcharge @10% of income-tax computed under section 115BAA or section
115BAB would be leviable. Since there is no threshold limit for applicability
of surcharge, consequently, there would be no marginal relief.
6.5 Foreign Company
Income-tax
Royalties and fees for rendering technical services (FTS) received from 50%
Government or an Indian concern in pursuance of an agreement,
approved by the Central Government, made by the company with the
Government or Indian concern between 1.4.1961 and 31.3.1976 (in case
of royalties) and between 1.3.1964 and 31.3.1976 (in case of FTS)
Other income 35%
Special rates for capital gains under sections 112, 112A and 111A would be
applicable to foreign company also.
Surcharge
(a) In case of a foreign company, whose total income > ` 1 crore but is
≤ ` 10 crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 1 crore but does not exceed ` 10 crore,
surcharge is payable at the rate of 2% of income-tax computed in accordance
with the rates given above.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not
exceed the amount of income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore by
more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 1 crore.
(b) In case of a foreign company, whose total income is > ` 10 crore
Where the total income exceeds ` 10 crore, surcharge is payable at the rate
of 5% of income-tax computed in accordance with the rates given above.
Marginal Relief
Marginal relief is available in case of such companies i.e., the total amount of
income-tax (together with surcharge) computed on such income should not
exceed the amount of income-tax and surcharge computed on total income
of ` 10 crore by more than the amount of income that exceeds ` 10 crore.
7. REBATE FOR RESIDENT INDIVIDUALS
[SECTION 87A]
In order to provide tax relief to the individual tax payers, section 87A provides a
rebate from the tax payable by an assessee, being an individual resident in India.
Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC
(i) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under section
115BAC and the total income of such individual does not exceed ` 7,00,000,
the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total
income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 25,000, whichever is less.
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of
income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income
of the assessee with which he is chargeable for any assessment year.
INCOME TAX LAW
ILLUSTRATION 9
Mr. Raghav aged 26 years and a resident in India, has a total income of
` 6,50,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit.
Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Raghav for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,000
Tax@5%of ` 3,50,000 17,500
Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ` 25,000) 17,500
Tax Liability Nil
(ii) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under section
115BAC and the total income of such individual exceeds ` 7,00,000 and
income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the amount by which the
total income is in excess of ` 7,00,000, the rebate would be as follows.
Step 1 – Total income (-) ` 7 lakhs (A)
Step 2 - Compute income-tax liability on total income (B)
Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B – A.
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of
income-tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income
of the assessee.
ILLUSTRATION 10
Mr. Pawan aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of
` 7,15,000, comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit.
Compute his tax liability for A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Pawan for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Step 1: Total Income of ` 7,15,000 - ` 7,00,000 15,000 (A)
Step 2: Tax on total income of ` 7,15,000
Tax@10%of ` 15,000 + ` 20,000 21,500 (B)
Step 3: Since B>A, rebate u/s 87A would be B-A
[` 21,500 - ` 15,000] 6,500
15,000
Add: HEC@4% 600
Tax Liability 15,600
Rebate to a resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal
provisions of the Act)
If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 5,00,000, the rebate shall be
equal to the amount of income-tax payable on his total income for any assessment
year or an amount of ` 12,500, whichever is less.
The amount of rebate under section 87A shall not exceed the amount of income-
tax (as computed before allowing such rebate) on the total income of the assessee
with which he is chargeable for any assessment year.
ILLUSTRATION 11
Mr. Piyush, aged 35 years and a resident in India, has a total income of ` 4,15,000,
comprising his salary income and interest on bank fixed deposit. Compute his tax liability
for A.Y.2025-26 if he exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Piyush for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 4,15,000
Tax@5%of ` 1,65,000 8,250
Less: Rebate u/s 87A (Lower of tax payable or ` 12,500) 8,250
Tax Liability Nil
INCOME TAX LAW
• Rebate under section 87A is allowed from income-tax computed
before adding Health and education cess on income-tax.
• Rebate under section 87A is, however, not available in respect of
tax payable on long-term capital gains taxable u/s 112A.
8. PARTIAL INTEGRATION OF AGRICULTURAL
INCOME WITH NON-AGRICULTURAL
INCOME
Agricultural income is exempt subject to conditions mentioned in the definition
given under section 2(1A). However, a method has been laid down to levy tax on
agricultural income in an indirect way. This concept is known as partial integration
of agricultural income with non-agricultural income. It is applicable to
individuals, HUF, AOPs, BOIs and artificial juridical persons. Two conditions which
need to be satisfied for partial integration are:
1. The net agricultural income should exceed ` 5,000 p.a., and
2. Non-agricultural income should exceed the maximum amount not chargeable
to tax. (i.e., If such person is paying tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC,
then ` 3,00,000 is the basic exemption limit irrespective of the age of the
person. If such person has exercised the option to shift out of the default tax
regime, then, the basic exemption limit would be ` 5,00,000 for resident
individuals of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous
year, ` 3,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more (but
less than 80 years) at any time during the previous year and
` 2,50,000 for all others). Only if non-agricultural income exceeds this limit,
partial integration would be required.
It may be noted that aggregation provisions do not apply to company, LLP, firm,
co-operative society and local authority. The object of aggregating the net
agricultural income with non-agricultural income is to tax the non-agricultural
income at higher rates.
Tax calculation in such cases is as follows:
Step 1: Add non-agricultural income with net agricultural income. Compute tax
on the aggregate amount.
Step 2: Add net agricultural income and the basic exemption limit available to
the assessee. Compute tax on the aggregate amount.
Step 3: Deduct the amount of income tax calculated in step 2 from the income
tax calculated in step 1 i.e., Step 1 – Step 2.
Step4: The sum so arrived at shall be –
- increased by surcharge, if applicable,
- reduced by the rebate, if any, available u/s 87A.
Step 5: Thereafter, it would be increased by health and education cess @4%.
The above concept can be clearly understood with the help of the following
illustration:
ILLUSTRATION 12
Mr. X, a resident, has provided the following particulars of his income for the
P.Y. 2024-25.
i. Income from salary (computed) - ` 10,80,000
ii. Income from house property (computed) - ` 2,50,000
iii. Agricultural income from a land in Jaipur - ` 4,80,000
iv. Expenses incurred for earning agricultural income - ` 1,70,000
Compute his tax liability for A.Y. 2025-26 assuming his age is -
(a) 45 years
(b) 70 years
SOLUTION
(a) Computation of tax liability (age 45 years)
Computation of total income of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 under
default tax regime under section 115BAC
For the purpose of partial integration of taxes, Mr. X has satisfied both the
conditions i.e.
1. Net agricultural income exceeds ` 5,000 p.a., and
2. Non-agricultural income exceeds the basic exemption limit of ` 3,00,000.
INCOME TAX LAW
His tax liability is computed in the following manner:
Particulars
` `
Income from salary 10,80,000
Income from house property 2,50,000
Net agricultural income [` 4,80,000 – ` 1,70,000] 3,10,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(1) (3,10,000) -
Gross Total Income 13,30,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A -
Total Income 13,30,000
Step 1 : ` 13,30,000 + ` 3,10,000 = ` 16,40,000
Tax on ` 16,40,000 = ` 1,82,000
(i.e., 5% of ` 4,00,000 plus 10% of ` 3,00,000 plus 15% of
` 2,00,000 plus 20% of ` 3,00,000 plus 30% of ` 1,40,000)
Step 2 : ` 3,10,000 + ` 3,00,000 = ` 6,10,000
Tax on ` 6,10,000 = ` 15,500
(i.e. 5% of ` 3,10,000)
Step 3 : ` 1,82,000 – ` 15,500 = ` 1,66,500
Step 4 & 5 : Total tax payable = ` 1,66,500
= ` 1,66,500 + 4% of ` 1,66,500 = ` 1,73,160.
Computation of total income of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 under
normal provisions of the Act
For the purpose of partial integration of taxes, Mr. X has satisfied both the
conditions i.e.
1. Net agricultural income exceeds ` 5,000 p.a., and
2. Non-agricultural income exceeds the basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000.
His tax liability is computed in the following manner:
Particulars
` `
Income from salary 10,80,000
Income from house property 2,50,000
Net agricultural income [` 4,80,000 – ` 1,70,000] 3,10,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(1) (3,10,000) -
Gross Total Income 13,30,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A -
Total Income 13,30,000
Step 1 : ` 13,30,000 + ` 3,10,000 = ` 16,40,000
Tax on ` 16,40,000 = ` 3,04,500
(i.e., 5% of ` 2,50,000 plus 20% of ` 5,00,000 plus 30% of
` 6,40,000)
Step 2 : ` 3,10,000 + ` 2,50,000 = ` 5,60,000
Tax on ` 5,60,000 = ` 24,500
(i.e. 5% of ` 2,50,000 plus 20% of ` 60,000)
Step 3 : ` 3,04,500 – ` 24,500 = ` 2,80,000
Step 4 & 5 : Total tax payable = ` 2,80,000
= ` 2,80,000 + 4% of ` 2,80,000 = ` 2,91,200.
(b) Computation of tax liability (age 70 years)
Computation of total income of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 under
default tax regime under section 115BAC
Tax liability of Mr. X would be same under default tax regime whether he is
of age of 45 years of 70 years i.e., ` 1,73,160.
INCOME TAX LAW
Computation of total income of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 under
normal provisions of the Act
His tax liability is computed in the following manner:
Step 1 : ` 13,30,000 + ` 3,10,000 = ` 16,40,000
Tax on ` 16,40,000 = ` 3,02,000
(i.e., 5% of ` 2,00,000 plus 20% of ` 5,00,000 plus 30% of
` 6,40,000)
Step 2 : ` 3,10,000 + ` 3,00,000 = ` 6,10,000
Tax on ` 6,10,000 = ` 32,000
(i.e. 5% of ` 2,00,000 plus 20% of ` 1,10,000)
Step 3 : ` 3,02,000 – ` 32,000 = ` 2,70,000
Step 4 & 5 : Total tax payable = ` 2,70,000
= ` 2,70,000 + 4% of ` 2,70,000 = ` 2,80,800.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Income-tax is the most significant direct tax. Entry 82 of the Union List i.e.,
List I of Seventh Schedule to Article 246 of the Constitution of India has given
the power to Parliament to make laws on taxes on income other than
agricultural income.
Components of income-tax law
• Income-tax Act, 1961 – governs the levy of income-tax in India.
• Income-tax Rules, 1962 – formulated for proper administration of the Act.
• Annual Finance Act – Amendments in the Income-tax Act, 1961 are
effected every year through the Annual Finance Act.
• Circulars – issued by CBDT to clarify the meaning and scope of certain
provisions of the Act.
• Notifications – issued to give effect to the provisions of the Act/ make or
amend Rules.
• Court decisions – interprets the various provisions of income-tax law.
Income-tax is a TAX levied on the TOTAL INCOME of the PREVIOUS YEAR of
every PERSON.
(1) Total Income: Total income has to be computed as per the provisions
contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. The following steps has to be followed
for computing the total income of an assessee:
Step 1 – Determination of residential status
Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads
Step 3 – Computation of income under each head after providing for
permissible deductions/ exemptions.
In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax under
the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions
of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under the normal provisions
of the Act are not permissible under the default tax regime.
INCOME TAX LAW
Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.
Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses
Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income
Step 7 – Providing Deductions from Gross Total Income
Here again, only very select deductions, namely, 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and
80JJAA, are allowable under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
Step 8 – Computation of Total income
Step 9 - Application of the rates of tax on the total income
For default tax regime, concessional tax rates are provided under section
115BAC. For optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act, the
tax rates are provided in the Annual Finance Act. The special rates u/s 111A,
112, 112A, 115BB, 115BBJ, etc. would apply under both tax regimes.
Step 10 – Add Surcharge, if applicable/ Deduct Rebate under section 87A, if
applicable
Step 11 – Add Health and education cess on income-tax
Step 12 – Compute Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT), if applicable, [under the
optional tax regime]
Step 13 - Examine whether to pay tax under default tax regime under section
115BAC or pay tax under the regular provisions of the Act, by comparing the
tax liability under both regimes.
Step 14 – Deduct Advance tax and tax deducted/ collected at source
Step 15 – The resultant figure would be Tax Payable/Tax Refundable
(2) Person: A person includes an individual, Hindu Undivided Family (HUF),
Association of Persons (AOP), Body of Individuals (BOI), a firm, a company etc.
(3) Concept of Previous year (P.Y.) and Assessment Year (A.Y.): Previous
year is the financial year immediately preceding the assessment year i.e., it is
the financial year ending on 31st March, in which the income has
accrued/received.
In case of a newly set-up business, the previous year would be the period
beginning with the date of setting up of the business or profession or, as the
case may be, the date on which the source of income newly came into existence,
and ending on 31st March.
Assessment year (A.Y.): Assessment year means the period of twelve months
commencing on the 1st April every year.
Exceptions to the rule that income is charged to income-tax in the
Assessment Year following the previous year:
The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the
assessment year following the previous year. However, in the following cases,
this rule does not apply and the income is taxed in the previous year in which
it is earned.
(i) Shipping business of non-resident [Section 172]
(ii) Persons leaving India [Section 174]
(iii) AOP/BOI/Artificial Juridical Person formed for a particular event or
purpose [Section 174A]
(iv) Persons likely to transfer property to avoid tax [Section 175]
(v) Discontinued business [Section 176]
Rate of tax for Undisclosed Sources of Income: The following undisclosed
incomes are chargeable to tax @78% [i.e., 60% plus surcharge @25% plus cess
@4%] as specified under section 115BBE:
(i) Cash Credits [Section 68]
(ii) Unexplained Investments [Section 69]
(iii) Unexplained money etc. [Section 69A]
(iv) Amount of investments etc., not fully disclosed in the books of account
[Section 69B]
(v) Unexplained expenditure [Section 69C]
(vi) Amount borrowed or repaid on hundi [Section 69D]
(4) Tax liability: Tax has to be computed by applying the rates of tax
mentioned in the Annual Finance Act and the rate specified under the Income-
tax Act, 1961, as the case may be.
INCOME TAX LAW
If an Individual/ Hindu Undivided Family (HUF)/ Association of Persons (AOP)/
Body of Individuals (BOI)/ Artificial Juridical Person is paying tax under default
tax regime, concessional tax rates are prescribed under section 115BAC.
However, if he/it exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime, tax
rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act of that year would apply.
Persons Rate of taxes
Individual/HUF/ Total income (in `) Rate of Tax
AOP/BOI/ Artificial Upto ` 3,00,000 Nil
Juridical Person
` 3,00,001 to ` 7,00,000 5%
(Under default tax
regime) ` 7,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 10%
` 10,00,001 to ` 12,00,000 15%
` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000 20%
Above ` 15,00,000 30%
Individual (As per Total income (in `) Rate of Tax
the normal
(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years) Nil
provisions of the
(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or
Act under the
above but less than 80 years and
optional tax
resident in India)
regime)
(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years
and resident in India)
` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case 5%
may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in cases (i) and
(ii) above, respectively]
` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 20%
Above ` 10,00,000 30%
HUF/AOP/BOI/ Total income (in `) Rate of Tax
Artificial Juridical
Upto ` 2,50,000 Nil
Person
` 2,50,001 to ` 5,00,000 5%
(As per the normal
provisions of the ` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 20%
Act under the Above ` 10,00,000 30%
optional tax
regime)
Firm/LLP/local 30%
authority
Co-operative Total income (in `) Rate of Tax
Society (not opting
Upto ` 10,000 10%
for the provisions
of section 115BAD ` 10,001 to ` 20,000 20%
or section 115BAE) Above ` 20,000 30%
Company (not Domestic Company Foreign
opting for the Company
provisions of
Total turnover Other
section
or gross domestic
115BAA/115BAB)
receipts in the companies
P.Y. 2022-23 ≤
` 400 crore
25% 30% 35%
Surcharge
Under the default tax regime
Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies
as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person
(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and 10%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)
> ` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore
(ii) Where the total income (including dividend income and 15%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)>
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore
(iii) - Where the total income (excluding dividend income 25%
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and
112A)> ` 2 crore
- Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains exceeding
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A 15%
(iv) Where the total income (including dividend income and 15%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)
> ` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) above
INCOME TAX LAW
Under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act
Individual/ HUF/ AOP (other than an AOP consisting of only companies
as members)/ BOI/ Artificial juridical person
(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and 10%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 50 lakh but is ≤ ` 1 crore
(ii) Where the total income (including dividend income and 15%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A)>
` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 2 crore
(iii) - Where the total income (excluding dividend income 25%
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and
112A)> ` 2 crore but is ≤ ` 5 crore
- Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains exceeding
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A 15%
(iv) - Where the total income (excluding dividend income 37%
and capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and
112A)> ` 5 crore
- Rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains exceeding
chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A. 15%
(v) Where the total income (including dividend income and 15%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 2 crore in cases not covered in (iii) and (iv) above
In case of an AOP of only companies as members
(i) Where the total income > ` 50 lakh but is < ` 1 crore 10%
(ii) Where the total income > ` 1 crore 15%
Firm/Limited Liability Partnership/Local Authorities
Where the total income > ` 1 crore 12%
Co-operative societies (other than a co-operative society opting for
section 115BAD or section 115BBE)
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 7%
Total income is > ` 10 crore 12%
Domestic company (other than a domestic company opting for section
115BAA or section 115BAB)
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 7%
Total income is > ` 10 crore 12%
Foreign company
Total income > ` 1 crore but is ≤ ` 10 crore 2%
Total income is > ` 10 crore 5%
Rebate under section 87A:
If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under
section 115BAC
(i) Where total income ≤ ` 7,00,000 - Rebate of up to ` 25,000 for resident
individuals.
(ii) Where total income > ` 7,00,000 and income-tax payable on such total
income exceeds the amount by which the total income is in excess of
` 7,00,000 - Rebate of tax on total income as reduced by the total income
exceeding ` 7,00,000 for resident individuals.
Under normal provisions of the Act
Rebate of up to ` 12,500 for resident individuals having total income of up to
` 5 lakh.
“Health and Education cess” on Income-tax: 4% of income-tax and
surcharge, if applicable
Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1).
However, agricultural income has to be aggregated with non-agricultural
income for determining the rate at which non-agricultural income would be
subject to tax, in case of individuals, HUF, AOPs & BOIs etc., where the –
• agricultural income exceeds ` 5,000 p.a. and
• non-agricultural income exceeds basic exemption limit.
The following are the steps to be followed in computation of tax-
Step 1: Tax on non-agricultural income plus agricultural income
Step 2: Tax on agricultural income plus basic exemption limit
Step 3: Tax payable by the assessee = Step 1 – Step 2
Step 4: Add Surcharge/Deduct Rebate u/s 87A, if applicable.
Step 5: Add Health and Education Cess@4%.
INCOME TAX LAW
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Who is an “Assessee”? Explain
2. State any four instances where the income of the previous year is assessable in
the previous year itself instead of the assessment year.
3. Whether the income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery is
taxable under the Income-tax Act, 1961? Examine.
4. What are the two schools of Hindu law and where are they prevalent? Explain.
Also, mention the difference between the two schools of Hindu Law.
5. What is the difference between an Association of Persons and Body of
Individuals?
6. Mr. Sumit, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 15 lakhs from sale of rubber
manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him in India
and ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained from
rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia during the A.Y.2025-26. What would
be his business income, assuming he has no other business?
7. Mr. Raja, a resident Indian, earns income of ` 10 lakhs from sale of coffee grown
and cured in India during the A.Y.2025-26. His friend, Mr. Shyam, a resident
Indian, earns income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted
and grounded by him in India during the A.Y.2025-26. What would be the
business income chargeable to tax in India of Mr. Raja and Mr. Shyam?
8. The Jain HUF in Assam comprises of Mr. Suresh Jain, his wife Mrs. Sapna Jain,
his son Mr. Sarthak Jain, his daughter-in-law Mrs. Preeti Jain, his daughter Miss
Seema Jain and his unmarried brother Mr. Pritam Jain. Which of the members
of the HUF are eligible for coparcenary rights?
9. Compute the tax liability under default tax regime of Mr. Kashyap (aged 35),
having total income of ` 51,75,000 for the Assessment Year 2025-26. Assume
that his total income comprises of salary income, income from house property
and interest on fixed deposit.
10. Mr. Agarwal, aged 40 years and a resident in India, has a total income of
` 6,50,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable @20% under section
112 of ` 55,00,000, short term capital gain taxable @15% under section 111A
of ` 65,00,000 and other income of ` 5,30,00,000. Compute his tax liability for
A.Y.2025-26 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the
normal provisions of the Act assuming that the total income and its
components are the same in both tax regimes.
11. Mr. Sharma aged 62 years and a resident in India, has a total income of
` 2,30,00,000, comprising long term capital gain taxable @12.5% under section
112 of ` 52,00,000, short term capital gain taxable @20% under section 111A
of ` 64,00,000 and other income of ` 1,14,00,000. Compute his tax liability for
A.Y.2025-26 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the
normal provisions of the Act assuming that the total income and its
components are the same in both tax regimes.
ANSWERS
1. As per section 2(7), assessee means a person by whom any tax or any other
sum of money is payable under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
In addition, the term includes –
 Every person in respect of whom any proceeding under the Act has
been taken for the assessment of –
• his income; or
• the income of any other person in respect of which he is
assessable; or
• the loss sustained by him or by such other person; or
• the amount of refund due to him or to such other person.
 Every person who is deemed to be an assessee under any provision of
the Act;
 Every person who is deemed to be an assessee in default under any
provision of the Act.
2. The income of an assessee for a previous year is charged to income-tax in the
assessment year following the previous year. However, in a few cases, the
income is taxed in the previous year in which it is earned. These exceptions
INCOME TAX LAW
have been made to protect the interests of revenue. The exceptions are as
follows:
(i) Where a ship, belonging to or chartered by a non-resident, carries
passengers, livestock, mail or goods shipped at a port in India, the ship
is allowed to leave the port only when the tax has been paid or
satisfactory arrangement has been made for payment thereof. 7.5% of
the freight paid or payable to the owner or the charterer or to any
person on his behalf, whether in India or outside India on account of
such carriage is deemed to be his income which is charged to tax in the
same year in which it is earned.
(ii) Where it appears to the Assessing Officer that any individual may leave
India during the current assessment year or shortly after its expiry and
he has no present intention of returning to India, the total income of
such individual for the period from the expiry of the respective previous
year up to the probable date of his departure from India is chargeable
to tax in that assessment year.
(iii) If an AOP/BOI etc. is formed or established for a particular event or
purpose and the Assessing Officer apprehends that the AOP/BOI is
likely to be dissolved in the same year or in the next year, he can make
assessment of the income up to the date of dissolution as income of
the relevant assessment year.
(iv) During the current assessment year, if it appears to the Assessing
Officer that a person is likely to charge, sell, transfer, dispose of or
otherwise part with any of his assets to avoid payment of any liability
under this Act, the total income of such person for the period from the
expiry of the previous year to the date, when the Assessing Officer
commences proceedings under this section is chargeable to tax in that
assessment year.
(v) Where any business or profession is discontinued in any assessment
year, the income of the period from the expiry of the previous year up
to the date of such discontinuance may, at the discretion of the
Assessing Officer, be charged to tax in that assessment year.
3. As per Explanation 3 to section 2(1A), income derived from saplings or
seedlings grown in a nursery shall be deemed to be agricultural income and
exempt from tax, whether or not the basic operations were carried out on
land.
4. The two schools of Hindu law are Dayabaga school, prevalent in West Bengal
and Assam, and Mitakshara school, prevalent in rest of India.
Under the Dayabaga school of Hindu Law, nobody acquires the right, share
in the property by birth as long as the head of family is living. Thus, the
children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as long as his
father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will acquire
right/share in the property. Hence, the father and his brothers would be the
coparceners of the HUF.
Under the Mitakshara school of Hindu Law, one acquires the right to the
family property by his birth and not by succession irrespective of the fact that
his elders are living. Thus, every child born in the family acquires a right/share
in the family property.
5. In order to constitute an Association of Persons (AOP), persons must join for
a common purpose or action and their object must be to produce income; it
is not enough that the persons receive the income jointly.
Body of Individuals denotes the status of persons like executors or trustees
who merely receive the income jointly and who may be assessable in like
manner and to the same extent as the beneficiaries individually. Thus, co-
executors or co-trustees are assessable as a BOI as their title and interest are
indivisible.
The difference between an AOP and BOI is that in case of a BOI, only
individuals can be the members, whereas in case of AOP, any person can be
its member i.e. entities like company, firm etc. can be the member of AOP but
not of BOI.
In case of an AOP, members voluntarily come together with a common will
for a common intention or purpose, whereas in case of BOI, such common
will may or may not be present.
6. Since Mr. Sumit is a resident, his global income would be taxable in India.
Income of ` 20 lakhs from sale of rubber manufactured from latex obtained
from rubber plants grown by him in Malaysia would be his business income
since it is from rubber plants grown outside India. 35% income from sale of
rubber manufactured from latex obtained from rubber plants grown by him
INCOME TAX LAW
in India would be taxable as business income and balance 65% would be
exempt as agricultural income.
Business income = 35% of ` 15 lakhs + ` 20 lakhs = ` 25.25 lakhs
7. In case of income derived from the sale of coffee grown and cured by the
seller in India, 25% income on such sale is taxable as business income. In case
of income derived from the sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and
grounded by the seller in India, 40% income on such sale is taxable as
business income.
Business income of Mr. Raja = 25% of ` 10 lakhs = ` 2.5 lakhs
Business income of Mr. Shyam = 40% of ` 20 lakhs = ` 8 lakhs
8. Dayabaga school of Hindu law is prevalent in Assam. In Dayabaga school of
Hindu law, nobody acquires the right, share in the property by birth as long
as the head of family is living.
Thus, the children do not acquire any right, share in the family property, as
long as his father is alive and only on death of the father, the children will
acquire right/share in the property.
Hence, Mr. Suresh Jain and his brother, Mr. Pritam Jain would be the
coparceners of the Jain HUF and are eligible for coparcenary rights.
9. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Kashyap for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime
(A) Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30% ` 11,02,500
Total ` 12,42,500
Add: Surcharge @ 10% ` 1,24,250 ` 13,66,750
(B) Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,40,000 plus
` 10,50,000) ` 11,90,000
(C) Total Income Less ` 50 lakhs ` 1,75,000
(D) Tax payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs plus the
excess of total income over ` 50 lakhs (B +C) ` 13,65,000
(E) Tax payable: lower of (A) and (D) ` 13,65,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 54,600
Tax liability ` 14,19,600
(F) Marginal Relief (A – D) ` 1,750
Alternative method -
(A) Tax payable including surcharge on total income of ` 51,75,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 51,75,000 @30% ` 11,02,500
Total ` 12,42,500
Add: Surcharge@10% ` 1,24,250 ` 13,66,750
(B) Tax Payable on total income of ` 50 lakhs (` 1,40,000 plus
` 10,50,000) ` 11,90,000
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 1,76,750
(D) Marginal Relief (` 1,76,750 – ` 1,75,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 50,00,000) ` 1,750
(E) Tax payable (A)-(D) ` 13,65,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 54,600
Tax liability ` 14,19,600
INCOME TAX LAW
10. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,00,000
Tax@20% of ` 55,00,000 11,00,000
Tax@15% of ` 65,00,000 9,75,000
Tax on other income of ` 5,30,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% 20,000
` 7,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @10% 30,000
` 10,00,000 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 30,000
` 12,00,000 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 60,000
` 15,00,000 – ` 5,30,00,000 @30% 1,54,50,000 1,55,90,000
1,76,65,000
Add: Surcharge @15% on ` 20,75,000 3,11,250
@25% on ` 1,55,90,000 38,97,500 42,08,750
2,18,73,750
Add: Health and education cess @4% 8,74,950
Tax Liability 2,27,48,700
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Agarwal for the A.Y.2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 6,50,00,000
Tax@20% of ` 55,00,000 11,00,000
Tax@15% of ` 65,00,000 9,75,000
Tax on other income of ` 5,30,00,000
` 2,50,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 12,500
` 5,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @20% 1,00,000
` 10,00,000 – ` 5,30,00,000 @30% 1,56,00,000 1,57,12,500
1,77,87,500
Add: Surcharge @15% on ` 20,75,000 3,11,250
@37% on ` 1,57,12,500 58,13,625 61,24,875
2,39,12,375
Add: Health and education cess @4% 9,56,495
Tax Liability 2,48,68,870
11. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000
Tax@12.5% of ` 52,00,000 6,50,000
Tax@20% of ` 64,00,000 12,80,000
Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% 20,000
` 7,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @10% 30,000
` 10,00,000 – ` 12,00,000 @15% 30,000
` 12,00,000 – ` 15,00,000 @20% 60,000
` 15,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30% 29,70,000 31,10,000
50,40,000
Add: Surcharge @15% 7,56,000
57,96,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% 2,31,840
Tax Liability 60,27,840
Computation of tax liability of Mr. Sharma for the A.Y.2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
Particulars
`
Tax on total income of ` 2,30,00,000
Tax@12.5% of ` 52,00,000 6,50,000
INCOME TAX LAW
Tax@20% of ` 64,00,000 12,80,000
Tax on other income of ` 1,14,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 10,000
` 5,00,000 – ` 10,00,000 @20% 1,00,000
` 10,00,000 – ` 1,14,00,000 @30% 31,20,000 32,30,000
51,60,000
Add: Surcharge @15% 7,74,000
59,34,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% 2,37,360
Tax Liability 61,71,360
CHAPTER 2
RESIDENCE AND
SCOPE OF TOTAL
INCOME
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to-
♦ appreciate the provisions for determining the residential
status of different persons;
♦ apply the relevant provisions to determine the residential
status of different persons;
♦ examine the scope of income of a person based on his
residential status;
♦ apply the relevant provisions to determine the total income
of a person based on his residential status.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Residence and Scope of Total Income
Residential Status Scope of Total Income
[Section 6] [Section 5]
Resident
Individual/HUF Firm/LLP/ and Resident but Non-
AOP/BOI/ ordinarily not ordinarily resident
company resident resident
etc.
Resident Non-
Deemed
resident
resident
Income which
Resident (Individual) Global
is received/
income is
and
deemed to be
ordinarily Resident taxable in received/ Income
resident India received/
accrued or
deemed
arisen/
to be
deemed to
received/
Non-resident accrue or
accrued
Resident arise in India
or arisen/
but not
deemed
ordinarily
to accrue
resident
or arise in
India
Income which
accrues or
arises outside
India being
derived from a
business
controlled in
or profession
set up in India
1. RESIDENTIAL STATUS [SECTION 6]
The incidence of tax on any assessee depends upon his residential status under
the Act. For all purposes of income-tax, taxpayers (individuals and HUF) are
classified into three broad categories on the basis of their residential status viz.
(1) Resident and ordinarily resident
(2) Resident but not ordinarily resident
(3) Non-resident
Taxpayers (other than individuals and HUF) are classified into two broad
categories on the basis of their residential status viz.
(1) Resident
(2) Non-resident
Resident and
Resident
ordinarily
resident
Deemed Resident but
Individual/HUF
resident not ordinarily
(Individual) resident
Non-resident
Residential Status
(Section 6)
Resident
Firm/AOP/Local
Authority/Company etc.
Non-resident
The residential status of an assessee must be ascertained with reference to each
previous year. A person who is resident and ordinarily resident in one year may
become non-resident or resident but not ordinarily resident in another year or
vice versa.
The provisions for determining the residential status of assessees are:
1.1 Residential Status of Individuals
1. Residential status on the basis of number of days of stay in India -
Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any
previous year, if he satisfies any one of the following conditions:
(i) He has been in India during the previous year for a total period of 182
days or more, or
(ii) He has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the
previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in
India for at least 60 days in the relevant previous year.
If the individual satisfies any one of the conditions mentioned above, he is a
resident. If both the above conditions are not satisfied, the individual is a
non-resident.
• The term “stay in India” includes stay in the territorial waters
of India (i.e. 12 nautical miles into the sea from the Indian
coastline). Even the stay in a ship or boat moored in the
territorial waters of India would be sufficient to make the individual resident
in India.
• It is not necessary that the period of stay must be continuous or active nor
is it essential that the stay should be at the usual place of residence, business
or employment of the individual.
• For the purpose of counting the number of days stayed in India, both the date
of departure as well as the date of arrival are considered to be in India.
• The residence of an individual for income-tax purpose has nothing to do
with citizenship, place of birth or domicile. An individual can, therefore, be
resident in more countries for tax purposes than one even though he can have
only one domicile.
Exceptions:
The following categories of individuals will be treated as resident in India
only if the period of their stay during the relevant previous year amounts to
182 days or more. In other words, even if such persons were in India for 60
days or more (but less than 182 days) in the relevant previous year, they will
not be treated as resident due to the reason that their stay in India was for
365 days or more during the 4 immediately preceding years.
(1) Indian citizen, who leaves India during the relevant previous year as a
member of the crew of an Indian ship or for purposes of employment
outside India, or
(2) Indian citizen or person of Indian origin1 who, being outside India
comes on a visit to India during the relevant previous year.
However, such person having total income, other than the income
from foreign sources [i.e., income which accrues or arises outside India
(except income from a business controlled in or profession set up in
India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India], exceeding
` 15 lakhs during the previous year will be treated as resident in India
if -
- the period of his stay during the relevant previous year amounts
to 182 days or more, or
- he has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding
the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has
been in India for at least 120 days in the previous year.
Stay in India for 120 days in the relevant P.Y. is not a
standalone condition. This condition requires stay in India
for 120 days in the relevant P.Y. + 365 days in the 4 years
immediately preceding the P.Y.
1A person is said to be of Indian origin if he or either of his parents or either of his grandparents
was born in undivided India.
How to determine period of stay in India for an Indian citizen, being a
crew member?
In case of foreign bound ships where the destination of the voyage is
outside India, there is uncertainty regarding the manner and the basis of
determining the period of stay in India for an Indian citizen, being a crew
member.
To remove this uncertainty, Explanation 2 to section 6(1) provides that in the
case of an individual, being a citizen of India and a member of the crew of a
foreign bound ship leaving India, the period or periods of stay in India shall,
in respect of such voyage, be determined in the prescribed manner and
subject to the prescribed conditions.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No.70/2015 dated 17.8.2015,
inserted Rule 126 in the Income-tax Rules, 1962 to compute the period of
stay in such cases.
According to Rule 126, for the purposes of section 6(1), in case of an
individual, being a citizen of India and a member of the crew of a ship, the
period or periods of stay in India shall, in respect of an eligible voyage, not
include the following period:
Period to be excluded
Period commencing from Period ending on
the date entered into the and the date entered into the
Continuous Discharge Certificate Continuous Discharge Certificate
in respect of joining the ship by in respect of signing off by that
the said individual for the individual from the ship in
eligible voyage respect of such voyage.
Meaning of certain term
Term Meaning
Eligible voyage A voyage undertaken by a ship engaged in the carriage of
passengers or freight in international traffic where –
(i) for the voyage having originated from any port in
India, has as its destination any port outside India; and
(ii) for the voyage having originated from any port outside
India, has as its destination any port in India.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. Anand is an Indian citizen and a member of the crew of a Singapore
bound Indian ship engaged in carriage of passengers in international traffic
departing from Chennai port on 6th June, 2024. From the following details for
the P.Y. 2024-25, determine the residential status of Mr. Anand for
A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that his stay in India in the last 4 previous years
(preceding P.Y. 2024-25) is 400 days:
Particulars Date
Date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in 6th June, 2024
respect of joining the ship by Mr. Anand
Date entered into the Continuous Discharge Certificate in 9th December,
respect of signing off the ship by Mr. Anand 2024
SOLUTION
In this case, since Mr. Anand is an Indian citizen and leaving India during
P.Y. 2024-25 as a member of the crew of the Indian ship, he would be
resident in India if he stayed in India for 182 days or more.
The voyage is undertaken by an Indian ship engaged in the carriage of
passengers in international traffic, originating from a port in India (i.e., the
Chennai port) and having its destination at a port outside India (i.e., the
Singapore port). Hence, the voyage is an eligible voyage for the purposes of
section 6(1).
Therefore, the period commencing from 6th June, 2024 and ending on
9th December, 2024, being the dates entered into the Continuous Discharge
Certificate in respect of joining the ship and signing off from the ship by
Mr. Anand, an Indian citizen who is a member of the crew of the ship, has to
be excluded for computing the period of his stay in India. Accordingly, 187
days [25+31+31+30+31+30+9] have to be excluded from the period of his
stay in India. Consequently, Mr. Anand’s period of stay in India during the
P.Y. 2024-25 would be 178 days [i.e., 365 days – 187 days]. Since his period
of stay in India during the P.Y. 2024-25 is less than 182 days, he is a non-
resident for A.Y. 2025-26.
2. Deemed resident [Section 6(1A)] – An individual, being an Indian citizen,
having total income, other than the income from foreign sources [i.e.,
income which accrues or arises outside India (except income from a
business controlled in or profession set up in India) and which is not
deemed to accrue or arise in India], exceeding ` 15 lakhs during the
previous year would be deemed to be resident in India in that previous year,
if he is not liable to tax in any other country or territory by reason of his
domicile or residence or any other criteria of similar nature.
However, this provision will not apply in case of an individual who is a
resident of India in the previous year as per section 6(1).
Meaning of “liable to tax” – Liable to tax, in relation to a person and with
reference to a country, means that there is an income-tax liability on such
person under the law of that country for the time being in force. It also
includes a person who has subsequently been exempted from such liability
under the law of that country.
• Only Indian citizen can be deemed resident. An individual who is not
an Indian citizen but a person of Indian Origin cannot be deemed
resident u/s 6(1A).
• Stay in India is not necessary for being a deemed resident u/s 6(1A).
Resident and ordinarily resident/Resident but not ordinarily resident
Only individuals and HUF can be “resident but not ordinarily resident” in India. All
other classes of assessees can be either a resident or non-resident. A not-
ordinarily resident person is one who satisfies any one of the conditions specified
u/s 6(6).
(i) If such individual has been non-resident in India in any 9 out of the 10
previous years preceding the relevant previous year, or
(ii) If such individual has, during the 7 previous years preceding the relevant
previous year, been in India for a period of 729 days or less, or
(iii) If such individual is an Indian citizen or person of Indian origin (who, being
outside India, comes on a visit to India in any previous year) having total
income, other than the income from foreign sources [i.e., income which
accrues or arises outside India (other than income derived from a business
controlled in or profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue
or arise in India], exceeding ` 15 lakhs during the previous year, who has
been in India for 120 days or more but less than 182 days during that
previous year, or
(iv) If such individual is an Indian citizen who is deemed to be resident in India
under section 6(1A).
A deemed resident u/s 6(1A) is always RNOR.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Brett Lee, an Australian cricket player visits India for 100 days in every financial
year. This has been his practice for the past 10 financial years.
(a) Find out his residential status for the assessment year 2025-26.
(b) Would your answer change if the above facts relate to Srinath, an Indian
citizen who resides in Australia and represents the Australian cricket team?
(c) What would be your answer if Srinath had visited India for 120 days instead
of 100 days every year, including P.Y.2024-25?
SOLUTION
(a) Determination of Residential Status of Mr. Brett Lee for the A.Y. 2025-26:-
Period of stay during previous year 2024-25 = 100 days
Calculation of period of stay during 4 preceding PYs (100 x 4 = 400 days)
2023-24 100 days
2022-23 100 days
2021-22 100 days
2020-21 100 days
Total 400 days
Mr. Brett Lee has been in India for a period more than 60 days during
previous year 2024-25 and for a period of more than 365 days during the 4
immediately preceding previous years. Therefore, since he satisfies one of
the basic conditions under section 6(1), he is a resident for the A.Y. 2025-26.
Computation of period of stay during 7 preceding previous years = 100 x 7
= 700 days
2023-24 100 days
2022-23 100 days
2021-22 100 days
2020-21 100 days
2019-20 100 days
2018-19 100 days
2017-18 100 days
Total 700 days
Since his period of stay in India during the past 7 previous years is less than
730 days, he is a not-ordinarily resident during the A.Y. 2025-26 (See Note
below).
Therefore, Mr. Brett Lee is a resident but not ordinarily resident during the
previous year 2024-25 relevant to the assessment year 2025-26.
Note: An individual, not being an Indian citizen, would be not-ordinarily
resident person if he satisfies any one of the conditions specified under section
6(6), i.e.,
(i) If such individual has been non-resident in India in any 9 out of the 10
previous years preceding the relevant previous year, or
(ii) If such individual has during the 7 previous years preceding the relevant
previous year been in India for a period of 729 days or less.
In this case, since Mr. Brett Lee satisfies condition (ii), he is a not-ordinarily
resident for the A.Y. 2025-26.
(b) If the above facts relate to Mr. Srinath, an Indian citizen, who residing in
Australia, comes on a visit to India, he would be treated as non-resident in
India, irrespective of his total income (excluding income from foreign
sources), since his stay in India in the current financial year is, in any case,
less than 120 days.
(c) In this case, if Srinath’s total income (excluding income from foreign
sources) exceeds ` 15 lakh, he would be treated as resident but not
ordinarily resident in India for P.Y.2024-25, since his stay in India is 120 days
in the P.Y.2024-25 and 480 days (i.e., 120 days x 4 years) in the immediately
four preceding previous years.
If his total income (excluding income from foreign sources) does not exceed
` 15 lakh, he would be treated as non-resident in India for the P.Y.2024-25,
since his stay in India is less than 182 days in the P.Y.2024-25.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Mr. B, a Canadian citizen, comes to India for the first time during the P.Y. 2020-21.
During the financial years 2020-21 2021-22, 2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-25, he
was in India for 55 days, 60 days, 90 days, 150 days and 70 days, respectively.
Determine his residential status for the A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
During the P.Y. 2024-25, Mr. B was in India for 70 days and during the 4 years
preceding the P.Y. 2024-25, he was in India for 355 days (i.e. 55+ 60+ 90+ 150
days).
Thus, he does not satisfy the basic condition under section 6(1). Therefore, he is a
non-resident for the P.Y. 2024-25.
1.2 Residential status of HUF
Resident: A HUF would be resident in India if the control and management of its
affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.
Non-resident: If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly
outside India, it would become a non-resident.
Meaning of the term “control and management”
• The expression ‘control and management’ referred to under section 6 refers
to the central control and management and not to the carrying on of day-
to-day business by servants, employees or agents.
• Control and management means de facto control and management and not
merely having the right to control or manage.
• The business may be done from outside India and yet its control and
management may be wholly within India. Therefore, control and
management of a business is said to be situated at a place where the head
and brain of the adventure is situated. Merely because the family has a
house in India, where some of the members reside in the previous year,
does not constitute that place as the seat of control and management of the
affairs of the HUF unless important decisions concerning the affairs of the
HUF are taken at that place.
• The place of control may be different from the usual place of running the
business and sometimes even the registered office of the assessee. This is
because the control and management of a business need not necessarily be
done from the place of business or from the registered office of the
assessee.
• But control and management do imply the functioning of the controlling
and directing power at a particular place with some degree of permanence.
Resident and ordinarily resident/ Resident but not ordinarily resident
If Karta of resident HUF satisfies both the following additional conditions (as
applicable in case of individual) then, resident HUF will be resident and ordinarily
resident, otherwise it will be resident but not ordinarily resident.
• Karta of resident HUF should be resident in at least 2 previous years out of
10 previous years immediately preceding relevant previous year.
• Stay of Karta during 7 previous years immediately preceding relevant
previous year should be 730 days or more.
ILLUSTRATION 4
The business of a HUF is transacted from Australia and all the policy decisions are
taken there. Mr. E, the Karta of the HUF, who was born in Kolkata, visits India during
the P.Y. 2024-25 after 15 years. He comes to India on 1.4.2024 and leaves for Australia
on 1.12.2024. Determine the residential status of Mr. E and the HUF for A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
(a) During the P.Y. 2024-25, Mr. E has stayed in India for 245 days (i.e.
30+31+30+31+31+30+31+30+1 days). Therefore, he is a resident. However,
since he has come to India after 15 years, he does not satisfy the condition
for being ordinarily resident.
Therefore, the residential status of Mr. E for the P.Y. 2024-25 is resident but
not ordinarily resident.
(b) Since the business of the HUF is transacted from Australia and policy
decisions are taken there, it is assumed that the control and management is
in Australia i.e., the control and management is wholly outside India.
Therefore, the HUF is a non-resident for the P.Y. 2024-25.
Note – If the control and management is in India, even partially, then, the
HUF would be resident in India. In such a case, the residential status of HUF
would be resident but not ordinarily resident, since the Karta’s stay in India is
for less than 730 days in the 7 previous years immediately preceding the
relevant previous year.
Residential Status of a HUF
Is the control and management
of its affairs situated wholly or
partly in India?
YES NO
HUF is
Is Karta resident in India atleast in any 2 PYs out of 10
Non-
PYs preceding the relevant PY?
resident
(+)
Is his stay in India for 730 days or more during the 7
PYs preceding the relevant PY?
YES NO
HUF is ROR HUF is RNOR
1.3 Residential status of firms, AoPs and BoIs
Resident: A firm, AoP and BoI would be resident in India if the control and
management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.
Non-resident: Where the control and management of the affairs is situated
wholly outside India, the firm, AoP and BoI would become a non-resident.
The residential status of the partners/ members is immaterial while
determining the residential status of a Firm/AOP/BOI.
1.4 Residential status of companies
A company would be resident in India in any previous year, if-
(i) it is an Indian company; or
(ii) its place of effective management, in that year, is in India.
“Place of effective management” to mean a place where key management and
commercial decisions that are necessary for the conduct of the business of an entity
as a whole are, in substance made [Explanation to section 6(3)].
Determination of residential status of a company
Whether POEM of the The company is a
Is the company an No No
company is in India in non-resident for
Indian company?
the relevant P.Y.? the relevant P.Y.
Yes
Yes
The company is a
resident in India for the
relevant P.Y.
Note – The guidelines issued by CBDT for determination of POEM of a foreign
company and transition mechanism for a company which is incorporated outside
India, which has not been assessed to tax in India earlier and has become resident
in India for the first time due to application of POEM, has been provided in Chapter
XII-BC. The same will be dealt with at the Final level.
1.5 Residential status of local authorities and artificial
juridical persons
Resident: Local authorities and artificial juridical persons would be resident in
India if the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in
India.
Non-resident: Where the control and management of the affairs is situated
wholly outside India, they would become non-residents.
2. SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME
Section 5 provides the scope of total income in terms of the residential status of
the assessee because the incidence of tax on any person depends upon his
residential status in India. The scope of total income of an assessee depends upon
the following three important considerations:
(i) the residential status of the assessee;
(ii) the place of accrual or receipt of income, whether actual or deemed; and
(iii) the point of time at which the income had accrued to or was received by or
on behalf of the assessee.
The ambit of total income of the three classes of assessees would be as follows:
(1) Resident and ordinarily resident (ROR)
The total income of an ROR would, under section 5(1), consist of:
(i) income received or deemed to be received in India during the previous year;
(ii) income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India
during the previous year; and
(iii) income which accrues or arises outside India even if it is not received or
brought into India during the previous year.
In simpler terms, an ROR has to pay tax on the total income accrued or deemed
to accrue, received or deemed to be received in or outside India during the
relevant previous year.
(2) Resident but not ordinarily resident (RNOR)
Under section 5(1), the total income of an RNOR would consist of –
(i) income received or deemed to be received in India during the previous year;
(ii) income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India
during the previous year; and
(iii) income derived from a business controlled in or profession set up in India,
even though it accrues or arises outside India.
Note – All other income accruing or arising outside India which is not received or
deemed to be received or deemed to accrue or arise in India would not be included
in his total income.
(3) Non-resident
A non-resident’s total income under section 5(2) includes:
(i) income received or deemed to be received in India in the previous year; and
(ii) income which accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise in India
during the previous year.
Note: All assessees, whether resident or not, are chargeable to tax in respect of
their income accrued, arisen, received or deemed to accrue, arise or to be
received in India whereas a resident alone (resident and ordinarily resident in the
case of individuals and HUF) is chargeable to tax in respect of income which
accrues or arises outside India.
Clarification regarding liability to income-tax in India of a non-resident
seafarer receiving remuneration in NRE (Non-Resident External) account
maintained with an Indian Bank [Circular No.13/2017, dated 11.04.2017 and
Circular No.17/2017, dated 26.04.2017]
Income by way of salary, received by non-resident seafarers, for services rendered
outside India on a foreign going ship (with Indian flag or foreign flag) and
received into the NRE bank account maintained with an Indian bank shall not be
included in the total income.
Residential Status and Scope of Total Income: Whether the following incomes
are to be included in Total Income?
Scope of total Resident and Resident but not Non-Resident
Income Ordinarily Ordinarily
Resident (ROR) Resident
(RNOR)
Income received Yes Yes Yes
or deemed to be
received in India
during the
previous year
Income accruing Yes Yes Yes
or arising or
deeming to
accrue or arise in
India during the
previous year
Income accruing Yes, even if such Yes, but only if No
or arising outside income is not such income is
India during the received or derived from a
previous year brought into India business controlled
during the in or profession set
previous year up in India;
Otherwise, No.
ILLUSTRATION 5
From the following particulars of income furnished by Mr. Anirudh pertaining to the
year ended 31.3.2025, compute the total income for the A.Y. 2025-26, if he is:
(i) Resident and ordinary resident;
(ii) Resident but not ordinarily resident;
(iii) Non-resident
Particulars `
(a) Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian Company, 15,000
received in Germany
(b) Dividend from a Japanese Company, received in Japan 10,000
(c) Rent from property in London deposited in a bank in London, later 75,000
on remitted to India through approved banking channels
(d) Dividend from RP Ltd., an Indian Company 6,000
(e) Agricultural income from land in Gujarat 25,000
SOLUTION
Computation of total income of Mr. Anirudh for the A.Y. 2025-26
Resident Resident Non-
Particulars & but not Resident
ordinarily ordinarily
resident resident
` ` `
1) Short term capital gains on sale of 15,000 15,000 15,000
shares of an Indian company, received
in Germany
2) Dividend from a Japanese company, 10,000 - -
received in Japan
3) Rent from property in London 52,500 - -
deposited in a bank in London [See
Note (i) below]
4) Dividend from RP Ltd., an Indian 6,000 6,000 6,000
Company
5) Agricultural income from land in
Gujarat [See Note (ii) below] - - -
Total Income 83,500 21,000 21,000
Notes:
(i) It has been assumed that the rental income is the gross annual value of the
property. Therefore, deduction @30% under section 24, has been provided
and the net income so computed is taken into account for determining the
total income of a resident and ordinarily resident.
`
Rent received (assumed as gross annual value) 75,000
Less: Deduction under section 24 (30% of ` 75,000) 22,500
Income from house property 52,500
(ii) Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1).
2.1 Meaning of “Income received or deemed to be
received”
All assessees are liable to tax in respect of the income received or deemed to be
received by them in India during the previous year irrespective of -
(i) their residential status, and
(ii) the place of its accrual.
Income is to be included in the total income of the assessee immediately on its
actual or deemed receipt. The receipt of income refers to only the first occasion
when the recipient gets the money under his control. Therefore, when once an
amount is received as income, remittance or transmission of that amount from
one place or person to another does not constitute receipt of income in the
hands of the subsequent recipient or at the place of subsequent receipt.
Income deemed to be received in India
[Section 7]
Contribution by the
Contribution in excess of 12% Amount transferred from
Central Government or
of salary to Recognised unrecognised provident
any other employer in the
provident fund or interest fund to recognised
P.Y. under a pension
credited in excess of 9.5% p.a provident fund (being the
scheme referred u/s
(Annual accretion to the credit employer's contribution
80CCD
of RPF) and interest thereon)
2.2 Meaning of Income ‘accruing’ and ‘due’
Accrue refers to the right to receive income, whereas due refers to the right to
enforce payment of the same. In other words, when the right to receive income
becomes vested in the assessee, it is said to accrue or arise. For e.g. salary for
work done in December will accrue throughout the month, day to day, but will
become due on the salary bill being passed on 31st December or 1st January.
Similarly, on Government securities, interest payable on specified dates arise
during the period of holding, day to day, but will become due for payment on the
specified dates.
Example : Interest on Government securities is usually payable on specified dates, say
on 1st January and 1st July. In all such cases, the interest would be said to accrue from
1st July to 31st December and on 1st January, it will fall due for payment.
It must be noted that income which has been taxed on accrual basis cannot be
assessed again on receipt basis, as it will amount to double taxation.
With a view to removing difficulties and clarifying doubts in the taxation of
income, Explanation 1 to section 5 specifically provides that an item of income
accruing or arising outside India shall not be deemed to be received in India
merely because it is taken into account in a balance sheet prepared in India.
Further, Explanation 2 to section 5 makes it clear that once an item of income is
included in the assessee’s total income and subjected to tax on the ground of its
accrual/deemed accrual, it cannot again be included in the person’s total income
and subjected to tax either in the same or in a subsequent year on the ground of
its receipt - whether actual or deemed.
2.3 Income deemed to accrue or arise in India [Section 9]
Certain types of income are deemed to accrue or arise in India even though they
may actually accrue or arise outside India.
esira ro
eurcca
ot
demeed
emocnI
])1(9
noitceS[
aidnI
rof seeF
f o g , an m dii ids aui n pr sa I y y ee n edm
a nis
oo gt mu ncn
io eI b
y fl bia , c s eei ln bch i avc yre aet
ps
yf bi
, y et
lbla
ay
yo aR p
yf bi , t es
le br
ae yt an
pI
d ni a a yp
i nd
ad n pn I me nd
a o
i Cv yi
bD
t nyb e
y me
r ela nb hl ra a t eS y va
op
G
d
ne sen
i
c dra
ai ev ie r dr ee ny ds I r nra
o ela
f rS
, ar io d e g ngm n In
i eo i su dc irrn
iac sI
tc ua
o
tuohtiw
aidnI
edistuo
naidnI
ot
ro yltcerid
a yb ,noitaredisnoc
rof
nezitiC
yltceridni
a ot naidnI
tnediser
non
A
secivres
ro hguorht
ni tnediser nosreP
etaroproc-non
tnemnrevoG
tnediser
deredner
morf
aidnI
ro tnediser-non
aidnI
edistuo
ro ynapmoc
ngierof
erehw ,RONR
a ot
snoitpecxE
si yenom
fI
hcus fo etagergga
ssenisuB
ynA
dna deworrob
000,05`
>
mus
ni
noitcennoC
eht rof
desu
deworrob
yenom
eht
fI
fo esoprup
aidnI
lacinhcet
ro desu
dna
ro ssenisub
ytlayor ro secivres
noisseforp
rof
desilitu era secivres
ni no deirrac
ssenisub
fo esoprup
eht
aidnI
ynA
no
deirrac noisseforp
ro
tessa/ytreporp
aidnI edistuo
fo
ecruos
ro
aidnI
ni emocni
lacinhcet
fI
yenom eht
fI
ro secivres
ro
desu dna deworrob
secivres
ytlayor
ro secivres lacinhcet
rof
desilitu
era
fo
refsnart
era secivres ytlayor
fo
esoprup
eht
tessa
latipac
gnikam rof desilitu
ro ssenisub
ni
detautis
yna morf emocni
noisseforp
aidnI
aidnI edistuo ecruos
aidnI
ni no
deirrac
emocni
gnikam
ro
ecruos
yna
morf
aidnI
ni
RESIDENCE AND SCOPE OF TOTAL INCOME
2.21
The categories of income which are deemed to accrue or arise in India are:
(1) Any income accruing or arising to an assessee in any place outside
India whether directly or indirectly
- through or from any business connection in India,
- through or from any property in India,
- through or from any asset or source of income in India or
- through the transfer of a capital asset situated in India
would be deemed to accrue or arise in India. [Section 9(1)(i)]
In the case of a non-resident, the following shall not, however, be deemed to
accrue or arise in India [Explanation 1 to section 9(1)(i)]:
(i) In the case of a business, in respect of which all the operations are not
carried out in India [Explanation 1(a) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a
business of which all the operations are not carried out in India, the income
of the business deemed to accrue or arise in India shall be only such part of
income as is reasonably attributable to the operations carried out in India.
Therefore, it follows that such part of income which cannot be reasonably
attributed to the operations in India, is not deemed to accrue or arise in
India.
(ii) Purchase of goods in India for export [Explanation 1(b) to section
9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, no income shall be deemed to accrue
or arise in India to him through or from operations which are confined to
the purchase of goods in India for the purpose of export.
(iii) Collection of news and views in India for transmission out of India
[Explanation 1(c) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, being a
person engaged in the business of running a news agency or of publishing
newspapers, magazines or journals, no income shall be deemed to accrue or
arise in India to him through or from activities which are confined to the
collection of news and views in India for transmission out of India.
(iv) Shooting of cinematograph films in India [Explanation 1(d) to section
9(1)(i)]: In the case of a non-resident, no income shall be deemed to accrue
or arise in India through or from operations which are confined to the
shooting of any cinematograph film in India, if such non-resident is :
(a) an individual, who is not a citizen of India or
(b) a firm which does not have any partner who is a citizen of India or
who is resident in India; or
(c) a company which does not have any shareholder who is a citizen of
India or who is resident in India.
(v) Activities confined to display of rough diamonds in SNZs [Explanation
1(e) to section 9(1)(i)]: In the case of a foreign company engaged in the
business of mining of diamonds, no income shall be deemed to accrue or
arise in India to it through or from the activities which are confined to
display of uncut and unassorted diamonds in any special zone notified by
the Central Government in the Official Gazette in this behalf.
Income from property, asset or source of income in India
Any income which arises from any property (movable, immovable, tangible and
intangible property) would be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Examples:
1. Hire charges or rent paid outside India for the use of the machinery or
buildings situated in India,
2. Deposits with an Indian company for which interest is received outside India etc.
3. Mr. X, resident in New York, USA, has a house property situated in India which
has been given on rent by him. Rent receivable/ received by Mr. X would be
taxable in India whether such rent is received by him in India or outside India
as the house property is situated in India.
Income through transfer of a capital asset situated in India
Capital gains arising through the transfer of a capital asset situated in India would
be deemed to accrue or arise in India in all cases irrespective of the fact whether
(i) the capital asset is movable or immovable, tangible or intangible;
(ii) the place of registration of the document of transfer etc., is in India or
outside; and
(iii) the place of payment of the consideration for the transfer is within India or
outside.
(2) Income from salaries earned in India [Section 9(1)(ii)]
Income, which falls under the head “Salaries”, is deemed to accrue or arise in
India, if it is earned in India. Salary payable for service rendered in India would be
treated as earned in India.
Further, any income under the head “Salaries” payable for rest period or leave
period which is preceded and succeeded by services rendered in India, and forms
part of the service contract of employment, shall be regarded as income earned in
India.
(3) Income from salaries payable by the Government for services rendered
outside India [Section 9(1)(iii)]
Income from ‘Salaries’ which is payable by the Government to a citizen of India
for services rendered outside India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
The following conditions have to be satisfied to treat such income as deemed to
accrue or arise in India:
• Income should be chargeable under the head 'Salaries’;
• The payer should be Government of India;
• The recipient should be an Indian citizen, whether resident or non-resident
in India;
• The services should be rendered outside India.
However, allowances and perquisites paid or allowed outside India by the
Government to an Indian citizen for services rendered outside India is exempt, by
virtue of section 10(7).
Exemption under section 10(7) would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Mr. David, an Indian citizen aged 40 years, a Government employee serving in the
Ministry of External Affairs, left India for the first time on 31.03.2024 due to his
transfer to High Commission of Canada. He did not visit India any time during the
P.Y. 2024-25. He has received the following income for the F.Y. 2024-25:
S. No. Particulars `
(i) Salary (Computed) 5,00,000
(ii) Foreign Allowance [not included in (i) above] 4,00,000
(iii) Interest on fixed deposit from bank in India 1,00,000
(iv) Income from agriculture in Nepal 2,00,000
(v) Income from house property in Nepal 2,50,000
Compute his Gross Total Income for A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
As per section 6(1), Mr. David is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2025-26, since he was
not present in India at any time during the P.Y. 2024-25.
As per section 5(2), a non-resident is chargeable to tax in India only in respect of
following incomes:
(i) Income received or deemed to be received in India; and
(ii) Income accruing or arising or deemed to accrue or arise in India.
In view of the above provisions, income from agriculture in Nepal and income
from house property in Nepal would not be chargeable to tax in the hands of
David, assuming that the same were received in Nepal. Income from ‘Salaries’
payable by the Government to a citizen of India for services rendered outside
India is deemed to accrue or arise in India as per section 9(1)(iii). Hence, such
income is taxable in the hands of Mr. David, even though he is a non-resident.
However, allowances or perquisites paid or allowed as such outside India by the
Government to a citizen of India for rendering service outside India is exempt
under section 10(7). Hence, foreign allowance of ` 4,00,000 is exempt under
section 10(7) in the hands of Mr. David.
Gross Total Income of Mr. David for A.Y. 2025-26
`
Particulars
Salaries (computed) 5,00,000
Income from other sources (Interest on fixed deposit in India) 1,00,000
Gross Total Income 6,00,000
(4) Dividend paid by an Indian company outside India [Section 9(1)(iv)]
Dividends paid by an Indian company outside India is deemed to accrue or arise
in India and would be taxable in the hands of shareholders.
(5) Interest [Section 9(1)(v)]
Under section 9(1)(v), an interest is deemed to accrue or arise in India if it is
payable by -
(i) the Government;
(ii) a person who is resident in India;
Exception: Where it is payable in respect of any debt incurred or money
borrowed and used for the purposes of a business or profession carried on
by him outside India or for the purposes of making or earning any income
from any source outside India, it will not be deemed to accrue or arise in
India.
(iii) a person who is a non-resident, when it is payable in respect of any debt
incurred or moneys borrowed and used for the purpose of a business or
profession carried on in India by him.
Exception: Interest on moneys borrowed by the non-resident for any
purpose in India other than a business or profession, will not be deemed to
accrue or arise in India.
Example : If a non-resident ‘A’ borrows money from a non-resident ‘B’ and
invests the same in shares of an Indian company, interest payable by ‘A’ to ‘B’
will not be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
(6) Royalty [Section 9(1)(vi)]
Royalty will be deemed to accrue or arise in India when it is payable by -
(i) the Government;
(ii) a person who is a resident in India
Exception: where it is payable in respect for the transfer of any right or the
use of any property or information used or for the utilization of services for
the purposes of a business or profession carried on by such person outside
India or for the purposes of making or earning any income from any source
outside India; or
(iii) a person who is a non-resident, only when the royalty is payable in respect
of any right, property or information used or services utilised for purposes
of a business or profession carried on in India or for the purposes of making
or earning any income from any source in India.
Important points:
(1) Lumpsum royalty not deemed to accrue arise in India: Lumpsum royalty
payments made by a resident for the transfer of all or any rights (including
the granting of a licence) in respect of computer software supplied by a
non-resident manufacturer along with computer hardware under any
scheme approved by the Government under the Policy on Computer
Software Export, Software Development and Training, 1986 shall not be
deemed to accrue or arise in India.
(2) Meaning of Royalty: The term ‘royalty’ means consideration (including any
lumpsum consideration but excluding any consideration which would be the
income of the recipient chargeable under the head ‘Capital gains’) for:
(i) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of licence) in
respect of a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or
process or trade mark or similar property;
(ii) the imparting of any information concerning the working of, or the
use of, a patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or process or
trade mark or similar property;
(iii) the use of any patent, invention, model, design, secret formula or
process or trade mark or similar property;
(iv) the imparting of any information concerning technical, industrial,
commercial or scientific knowledge, experience or skill;
(v) the use or right to use any industrial, commercial or scientific
equipment2;
2but not including the amounts referred to in section 44BB containing presumptive tax provisions
relating to non-resident engaged in the business of exploration, etc., of mineral oils, which will be
dealt with at the final level.
(vi) the transfer of all or any rights (including the granting of licence) in
respect of any copyright, literary, artistic or scientific work including
films or video tapes for use in connection with television or tapes for
use in connection with radio broadcasting.
Note: Consideration for sale, distribution or exhibition of
cinematographic films is covered within the scope of royalty.
(vii) the rendering of any service in connection with the activities listed
above.
The definition of ‘royalty’ for this purpose is wide enough to cover both
industrial royalties as well as copyright royalties. The definition specially
excludes income which should be chargeable to tax under the head ‘capital
gains’.
(3) Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty
within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)
The consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty by
clarifying that, transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property
or information includes and has always included transfer of all or any right
for use or right to use a computer software (including granting of a licence)
irrespective of the medium through which such right is transferred.
(4) Consideration in respect of any right, property or information – Is it
royalty?
Royalty includes and has always included consideration in respect of any
right, property or information, whether or not,
(a) the possession or control of such right, property or information is with the
payer;
(b) such right, property or information is used directly by the payer;
(c) the location of such right, property or information is in India.
(5) Meaning of Process: The term “process” includes and shall be deemed to
have always included transmission by satellite (including up-linking,
amplification, conversion for downlinking of any signal), cable, optic fibre or
by any other similar technology, whether or not such process is secret.
(7) Fees for technical services [Section 9(1)(vii)]
Any fees for technical services will be deemed to accrue or arise in India if they
are payable by -
(i) the Government,
(ii) a person who is resident in India
Exception: Where the fees are payable in respect of technical services
utilised in a business or profession carried on by such person outside India
or for the purpose of making or earning any income from any source
outside India.
(iii) a person who is a non-resident, only where the fees are payable in respect
of services utilised in a business or profession carried on by the non-
resident in India or where such services are utilised for the purpose of
making or earning any income from any source in India.
Fees for technical services means any consideration (including any lumpsum
consideration) for the rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy
services (including providing the services of technical or other personnel).
However, it does not include consideration for any construction, assembly, mining
or like project undertaken by the recipient or consideration which would be
income of the recipient chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’.
Income deemed to accrue or arise in India to a non-resident by way of
interest, royalty and fees for technical services to be taxed irrespective of
territorial nexus (Explanation to section 9)
Income by way of interest, royalty or fees for technical services which is deemed
to accrue or arise in India by virtue of clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) of section 9(1), shall
be included in the total income of the non-resident, whether or not –
(i) the non-resident has a residence or place of business or business
connection in India; or
(ii) the non-resident has rendered services in India.
In effect, the income by way of fees for technical services, interest or royalty, from
services utilized in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in case of a
non-resident and be included in his total income, whether or not such services
were rendered in India.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Miss Vivitha paid a sum of 5000 USD to Mr. Kulasekhara, a management consultant
practising in Colombo, specializing in project financing. The payment was made in
Colombo. Mr. Kulasekhara is a non-resident. The consultancy is related to a project
in India with possible Ceylonese collaboration. Is this payment chargeable to tax in
India in the hands of Mr. Kulasekhara, since the services were used in India?
SOLUTION
A non-resident is chargeable to tax in respect of income received outside India
only if such income accrues or arises or is deemed to accrue or arise to him in
India.
The income deemed to accrue or arise in India under section 9 comprises, inter
alia, income by way of fees for technical services, which includes any
consideration for rendering of any managerial, technical or consultancy services.
Therefore, payment to a management consultant relating to project financing is
covered within the scope of “fees for technical services”.
The Explanation below section 9(2) clarifies that income by way of, inter alia, fees
for technical services, from services utilized in India would be deemed to accrue
or arise in India in case of a non-resident and be included in his total income,
whether or not such services were rendered in India or whether or not the non-
resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in India.
In the instant case, since the services were utilized in India, the payment received
by Mr. Kulasekhara, a non-resident, in Colombo is chargeable to tax in his hands
in India, as it is deemed to accrue or arise in India.
(8) Any sum of money paid by a resident Indian to a non-corporate non-
resident or foreign company or to a resident but not ordinarily resident
in India [Section 9(1)(viii)]
Income arising outside India, being any sum of money paid without consideration,
by an Indian resident person to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company
or to a RNOR would be deemed to accrue or arise in India if the same is
chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) i.e., if the aggregate of such sum received
by a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or a RNOR exceeds
` 50,000.
You may refer to Unit 5 of Chapter 3 where chargeability of any sum of money
received is discussed in detail.
This deeming provision applies to only sum of money paid outside India
to a non-corporate non-resident or foreign company or to a RNOR, and
not in respect of property, movable or immovable, transferred outside
India without consideration or for inadequate consideration to a non-corporate
non-resident or foreign company or a RNOR.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Compute the total income in the hands of an individual aged 35 years, being a
resident and ordinarily resident, resident but not ordinarily resident, and non-
resident for the A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)–
Particulars Amount (`)
Interest on UK Development Bonds, 50% of interest received in India 10,000
Income from a business in Chennai (50% is received in India) 20,000
Short term capital gains on sale of shares of an Indian company, 20,000
received in London
Dividend from British company received in London 5,000
Long term capital gains on sale of plant at Germany, 50% of gains 40,000
are received in India
Income earned from business in Germany which is controlled in 70,000
Delhi (` 40,000 is received in India)
Profits from a business in Delhi but managed entirely from London 15,000
Income from house property in London deposited in a Bank at 50,000
London, brought to India (Computed)
Interest on debentures in an Indian company, received in London 12,000
Fees for technical services rendered in India but received in London 8,000
Profits from a business in Mumbai, managed from London 26,000
Income from property situated in Nepal received there (Computed) 16,000
Past foreign untaxed income brought to India during the previous 5,000
year
Income from agricultural land in Nepal, received there and then 18,000
brought to India
Income from profession in Kenya which was set up in India, received 5,000
there but spent in India
Gift received on the occasion of his wedding 20,000
Interest on savings bank deposit in State Bank of India 12,000
Income from a business in Russia, controlled in Russia 20,000
Dividend from Reliance Petroleum Limited, an Indian Company 5,000
Agricultural income from a land in Rajasthan 15,000
SOLUTION
Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2025-26
Resident Resident Non-
and but not resident
Particulars
ordinarily ordinarily
resident resident
`
` `
Interest on UK Development Bonds, 50% of 10,000 5,000 5,000
interest received in India
Income from a business in Chennai (50% is 20,000 20,000 20,000
received in India)
Short term capital gains on sale of shares of 20,000 20,000 20,000
an Indian company, received in London
Dividend from British company received in 5,000 - -
London
Long term Capital gains on sale of plant at 40,000 20,000 20,000
Germany, 50% of gains are received in India
Income earned from business in Germany 70,000 70,000 40,000
which is controlled in Delhi, out of which
` 40,000 is received in India
Profits from a business in Delhi but 15,000 15,000 15,000
managed entirely from London
Income from house property in London 50,000 - -
deposited in a Bank at London, later on
remitted to India
Interest on debentures in an Indian 12,000 12,000 12,000
company, received in London
Fees for technical services rendered in India 8,000 8,000 8,000
but received in London
Profits from a business in Mumbai, 26,000 26,000 26,000
managed from London
Income from property situated in Nepal and 16,000 - -
received there
Past foreign untaxed income brought to - - -
India during the previous year
Income from agricultural land in Nepal, 18,000 - -
received there and then brought to India
Income from profession in Kenya which was 5,000 5,000 -
set up in India, received there but spent in
India
Gift received on the occasion of his - - -
wedding [not taxable]
Interest on savings bank deposit in State 12,000 12,000 12,000
Bank of India
Income from a business in Russia, 20,000 - -
controlled in Russia
Dividend from Reliance Petroleum Limited, 5,000 5,000 5,000
an Indian Company
Agricultural income from a land in
Rajasthan [Exempt under section 10(1)] - -
Gross Total Income 3,52,000 2,18,000 1,83,000
Less: Deduction under section 80TTA
[Interest on savings bank account subject to
a maximum of ` 10,000] 10,000 10,000 10,000
Total Income 3,42,000 2,08,000 1,73,000
SU
TEL
laudividni
na
fo
sutats
laitnediseR
)I(
)6(
)5(
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
)A1(6
)1(6
)1(6
)1(6
)1(6
noitceS
–
tnediser
demeeD
OIP
ro
nezitic
naidnI
OIP
ro
nezitic
naidnI
nezitic
naidnI
slaudividni
llA
snoitidnoc
niaM
esohw
nezitic
naidnI
aidnI
edistuo
gnidiser
edistuo
gnidiser
aidnI
gnivael
naht
rehtO[
.lcxe(
emocni
latot
eht
gnirud
aidnI
gnitisiv
aidnI
gnitisiv
aidnI
tnaveler
ni
])5(
dna
)4(
,)3(
ngierof
morf
emocnI
gnivah
dna
.Y.P
tnaveler
tnaveler
eht
gnirud
rof
.Y.P
ro
)a(
rehtiE[
,hkal
` >
)secruos
.lcxe(
emocni
latot
latot
gnivah
dna
.Y.P
tnemyolpme
eb
dluohs)b(
ot
elbail
ton
si
ohw
ngierof
morf
emocnI
.lcxe(
emocni
rebmem
sa
ro
rof
deifsitas
rehto
yna
ni
xat
hkal
` >
)secruos
ngierof
morf
emocnI
fo
werc
fo
a
gnieb
yrtnuoc
hkal
` ≤
)secruos
pihs
naidnI
]tnediser
X
√
√
√
√
tnaveler
eht
ni
syad
281≥
)a(
.Y.P
eht
ni
syad
≥
)RO(
eht
ni
syad
≥
)b(
.Y.P
tnaveler
≥
+
.Y.P
tnaveler
+
yletaidemmi
ni syad
x
ni
syad
≥
x
x
√
sYP
gnidecerp
sYP
gnidecerp
yletaidemmi
)6(6
noitceS
)6(6
noitceS
)6(6
noitceS
snoitidnoc
lanoitiddA
RONR
tluafed
yB
fi
,RONR
tluafed
yB
.ROR
,deifsitas
era
)ii(
dna
)i(
htob
fI
ni
ni
syad
≥
)i(
semoceb
laudividni
RONR
esiwrehtO
gnidecerp
yletaidemmi
eht
ot
eud
tnediser
era
)ii(
ron
)i(
rehtien
ro
deifsitas
era
)ii(
ro
)i(
rehtie
fi
,.e.i
sYP
deifidom
fo
tnemllifluf
.RONR
,deifsitas
sraey
≥
rof
tnediseR
)ii(
evoba
noitidnoc
dnoces
eht
fo
tuo
gnidecerp
yletaidemmi
sYP
2.34 INCOME TAX LAW
Notes -
(1) Section 6(1A) would not apply in case of an individual who is said to be
resident in India in the previous year under section 6(1).
(2) A person is said to be of Indian origin if he or either of his parents or either
of his grandparents was born in undivided India
(3) “Income from foreign sources” means income which accrues or arises outside
India (except income derived from a business controlled in or a profession
set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India.
(II) HUF [ROR/RNOR/non-resident]
A HUF would be resident in India if the control and management of
its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.
If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly
outside India, it would become a non-resident.
If the HUF is resident, then the satisfaction or otherwise of additional
conditions by Karta would determine whether the HUF is ROR or RNOR.
If Karta satisfies both the additional conditions [(i) & (ii)] in (I) above,
then, the HUF would be ROR. Otherwise, the HUF would be RNOR.
(III) Firms , AoPs and BoIs [Resident/Non-resident]
(i) A firm, AoP or BoI would be resident in India, if the control and
management of its affairs is situated wholly or partly in India.
(ii) If the control and management of the affairs is situated wholly
outside India, they would become a non-resident.
(IV) Companies [Resident/Non-resident]
(i) A company would be resident in India in any previous year, if it is
an Indian company or its place of effective management (POEM)
in that year, is in India.
(ii) If the company is not an Indian Company and its POEM is also
not in India in that year, it would become a non-resident for that
year.
Section 5 [Scope of Total Income]
Resident and Resident but not Ordinarily Non-Resident
Ordinarily Resident Resident
Income received/ Income which is received/ Income received/
deemed to be deemed to be received/ accrued deemed to be
received/accrued or or arisen/ deemed to accrue or received/accrued
arisen/deemed to arise in India; or arisen/deemed
accrue or arise in or to accrue or arise
AND
outside India in India.
Income which accrues or arises
In short, the global
outside India being derived from
income is taxable.
a business controlled in or
profession set up in India.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Ram, an Indian citizen, left India on 22.09.2024 for the first time to work as
an officer of a company in Germany. Determine the residential status of Ram
for the A.Y. 2025-26.
2. Mr. Dey, residing in US since 1990, visits India for 30 days every year. He
came back to India on 1.4.2023 for permanent settlement. What will be his
residential status for A.Y. 2025-26?
3. Mr. Ramesh & Mr. Suresh are brothers, and they earned the following incomes
during the F.Y. 2024-25. Mr. Ramesh settled in Canada in the year 1996 and
Mr. Suresh settled in Delhi. Compute the total income for the
A.Y. 2025-26 assuming that both have exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Sr. Particulars Mr. Ramesh Mr. Suresh
No. (`) (`)
1. Interest on Canada Development Bonds 35,000 40,000
(only 50% of interest received in India)
2. Dividend from British company, received in 28,000 20,000
London
3. Profits from a business in Nagpur, but 1,00,000 1,40,000
managed directly from London
4. Short term capital gain on sale of shares of 60,000 90,000
an Indian company, received in India
5. Income from a business in Chennai 80,000 70,000
6. Fees for technical services rendered in India, 1,00,000 -
but received in Canada
7. Interest on savings bank deposit in UCO 7,000 12,000
Bank, Delhi
8. Agricultural income from a land situated in 55,000 45,000
Andhra Pradesh
9. Rent received in respect of house property at 1,00,000 60,000
Bhopal
10. Life insurance premium paid --- 30,000
4. Examine the correctness or otherwise of the statement - “Income deemed to
accrue or arise in India to a non-resident by way of interest, royalty and fees
for technical services is to be taxed irrespective of territorial nexus”.
5. Examine with reasons whether the following transactions attract income-tax
in India in the hands of recipients:
(i) Salary payable by Central Government to Mr. John, a citizen of India of
` 7,00,000 for the services rendered outside India considering that he
pays tax as per the provisions of section 115BAC.
(ii) Interest on moneys borrowed from outside India ` 5,00,000 by a non-
resident for the purpose of business within India say, at Mumbai.
(iii) Post office savings bank interest of ` 19,000 received by a resident
assessee, Mr. Ram, aged 46 years if he exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(iv) Royalty paid by a resident to a non-resident in respect of a business
carried on outside India.
(v) Legal charges of ` 5,00,000 paid in Delhi to a lawyer of United Kingdom
who visited India to represent a case at the Delhi High Court.
ANSWERS
1. Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any
previous year if he satisfies any one of the following conditions -
(i) He has been in India during the previous year for a total period of 182
days or more, or
(ii) He has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding the
previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has been in
India for at least 60 days in the previous year.
In the case of Indian citizens leaving India for employment, the period of
stay during the previous year must be 182 days instead of 60 days given in
(ii) above.
During the previous year 2024-25, Mr. Ram, an Indian citizen, was in India
for 175 days only (i.e., 30+31+30+31+31+22 days). Thereafter, he left India
for employment purposes.
Since he does not satisfy the minimum criteria of 182 days stay in India
during the relevant previous year, he is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2025-26.
2. Mr. Dey is a resident in A.Y. 2025-26 since he has stayed in India for a
period of 365 days (more than 182 days) during the P.Y. 2024-25.
As per section 6(6), a person will be “Not ordinarily Resident” in India in any
previous year, if such person, inter alia,:
(a) has been a non-resident in 9 out of 10 previous years preceding the
relevant previous year; or
(b) has during the 7 previous years immediately preceding the relevant
previous year been in India for 729 days or less.
If he does not satisfy either of these conditions, he would be a resident and
ordinarily resident.
For the previous year 2024-25 (A.Y. 2025-26), his status would be “Resident
but not ordinarily resident” since he was non-resident in 9 out of 10
previous years immediately preceding the P.Y. 2024-25. He was resident
only in the P.Y. 2023-24. Prior to that, he was non-resident in all the years
since his stay in India was only for 30 days each year.
He can be resident but not ordinarily resident also due to the fact that he
has stayed in India only for 546 days [366 days in P.Y. 2023-24 + (30 days x
6 years)] in 7 previous years immediately preceding the P.Y. 2024-25, which
is less than 730 days.
3. Computation of total income of Mr. Ramesh & Mr. Suresh
for the A.Y. 2025-26
S. Particulars Mr. Ramesh Mr.
No. (Non- Suresh
Resident) (Resident)
(`) (`)
1. Interest on Canada Development Bond 17,500 40,000
(See Note 2)
2. Dividend from British Company received in - 20,000
London (See Note 3)
3. Profits from a business in Nagpur but managed 1,00,000 1,40,000
directly from London
(See Note 2)
4. Short term capital gain on sale of shares of an 60,000 90,000
Indian company received in India (See Note
2)
5. Income from a business in Chennai 80,000 70,000
(See Note 2)
6. Fees for technical services rendered in India, 1,00,000 -
but received in Canada
(See Note 2)
7. Interest on savings bank deposit in UCO Bank, 7,000 12,000
Delhi (See Note 2)
8. Agricultural income from a land situated in - -
Andhra Pradesh (See Note 4)
9. Income from house property at Bhopal (See
Note 5) 70,000 42,000
Gross Total income 4,34,500 4,14,000
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A
Section 80C - Life insurance premium - 30,000
Section 80TTA (See Note 6) 7,000 10,000
Total Income 4,27,500 3,74,000
Notes:
1. Mr. Ramesh is a non-resident since he has been living in Canada since
1996. Mr. Suresh, is settled in Delhi, and thus, assumed as a resident
and ordinarily resident.
2. In case of a resident and ordinarily resident, his global income is
taxable as per section 5(1). However, as per section 5(2), in case of a
non-resident, only the following incomes are chargeable to tax:
(i) Income received or deemed to be received in India; and
(ii) Income accruing or arising or deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Therefore, fees for technical services rendered in India would be
taxable in the hands of Mr. Ramesh, even though he is a non-resident.
The income referred to in Sl. No. 3,4,5 and 7 are taxable in the hands
of both Mr. Ramesh and Mr. Suresh since they accrue or arise/
deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Interest on Canada Development Bond would be fully taxable in the
hands of Mr. Suresh, whereas only 50%, which is received in India, is
taxable in the hands of Mr. Ramesh.
3. Dividend received from British company in London by Mr. Ramesh, a
non-resident, is not taxable since it is accrued and received outside
India. However, such dividend received by Mr. Suresh is taxable, since
he is a resident and ordinarily resident.
4. Agricultural income from a land situated in India is exempt under
section 10(1) in the case of both non-residents and residents.
5. Income from house property -
Mr. Ramesh Mr. Suresh
(`) (`)
Rent received 1,00,000 60,000
Less: Deduction u/s 24(a) @30% 30,000 18,000
Net income from house property 70,000 42,000
The net income from house property in India would be taxable in the
hands of both Mr. Ramesh and Mr. Suresh, since the accrual and
receipt of the same are in India.
6. In case of an individual, interest upto ` 10,000 from savings account
with, inter alia, a bank is allowable as deduction under section 80TTA.
4. This statement is correct.
As per Explanation to section 9, income by way of interest, royalty or fees
for technical services which is deemed to accrue or arise in India by virtue of
clauses (v), (vi) and (vii) of section 9(1), shall be included in the total income
of the non-resident, whether or not -
(i) non-resident has a residence or place of business or business
connection in India; or
(ii) the non-resident has rendered services in India.
In effect, the income by way of fees for technical services, interest or royalty
from services utilised in India would be deemed to accrue or arise in India in
case of a non-resident and be included in his total income, whether or not
such services were rendered in India and irrespective of whether the non-
resident has a residence or place of business or business connection in
India.
5. Taxability of receipts
Taxable/ Amount liable Reason
Not to tax (`)
Taxable
(i) Taxable 6,25,000 As per section 9(1)(iii), salaries payable
by the Government to a citizen of India
for service rendered outside India shall
be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Therefore, salary paid by Central
Government to Mr. John for services
rendered outside India would be
deemed to accrue or arise in India since
he is a citizen of India. He would be
entitled to standard deduction of
` 75,000 under section 16(ia).
(ii) Taxable 5,00,000 As per section 9(1)(v)(c), interest
payable by a non-resident on moneys
borrowed and used for the purposes of
business carried on by such person in
India shall be deemed to accrue or arise
in India in the hands of the recipient.
(iii) Partly 5,500 The interest on Post office savings bank
Taxable a/c would be exempt u/s 10(15)(i) only
to the extent of ` 3,500 in case of an
individual a/c. Further, interest upto
` 10,000, would be allowed as
deduction u/s 80TTA from Gross Total
Income. Balance ` 5,500 i.e., ` 19,000 -
` 3,500 - ` 10,000 would be taxable in
the hands of Mr. Ram, a resident.
(iv) Not - Royalty paid by a resident to a non-
Taxable resident in respect of a business carried
outside India would not be taxable in
the hands of the non-resident provided
the same is not received in India. This
has been provided as an exception to
deemed accrual mentioned in section
9(1)(vi)(b).
(v) Taxable 5,00,000 In case of a non-resident, any income
which accrues or arises in India or which
is deemed to accrue or arise in India or
which is received in India or is deemed
to be received in India is taxable in India.
Therefore, legal charges paid in India to
a non-resident lawyer of UK, who visited
India to represent a case at the Delhi
High Court would be taxable in India.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
UNIT – 2: INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to-
♦ comprehend when income is chargeable under the head
“Income from house property”;
♦ appreciate the meaning and tax treatment of composite
rent;
♦ determine annual value of different categories of house
property;
♦ compute income from house property for different
categories of house property;
♦ comprehend and apply the tax treatment on recovery of
unrealized rent and arrears of rent;
♦ compute income from co-owned property.
2.1 CHARGEABILITY [SECTION 22]
(i) The process of computation of income under the head “Income from
house property” starts with the determination of annual value of the
property. The concept of annual value and the method of determination is
laid down in section 23.
(ii) The annual value of any property comprising of buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto of which the assessee is the owner is chargeable to
tax under the head “Income from house property”.
Exceptions: Annual value of the following properties are chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession”-
(i) Portions of property occupied by the assessee for the purpose of any
business or profession carried on by him
(ii) Commercial properties of an assessee engaged in the business of letting out
of properties.
It is pertinent to note that any income from letting out of a residential
house or part thereof by the assessee, being owner shall always be
chargeable under the head “Income from house property.
• Annual value is the amount for which the property might reasonably be
expected to let from year to year.
2.2 CONDITIONS FOR CHARGEABILITY
(i) Property should consist of any building or land appurtenant thereto.
(a) Buildings include not only residential buildings, but also factory
buildings, offices, shops, godowns and other commercial premises.
(b) Land appurtenant means land connected with the building like
garden, garage etc.
Income from letting out of vacant land is, however, taxable under
the head “Income from other sources” or “Profits and gains from
business or profession”, as the case may be.
(ii) Assessee must be the owner of the property
(a) Owner is the person who is entitled to receive income from the
property in his own right.
(b) The requirement of registration of the sale deed is not warranted.
(c) Ownership includes both free-hold and lease-hold rights.
(d) Ownership includes deemed ownership (discussed later in point 2.11)
(e) The person who owns the building need not also be the owner of the
land upon which it stands.
(f) The assessee must be the owner of the house property during the
previous year. It is not material whether he is the owner in the
assessment year.
(g) If the title of the ownership of the property is under dispute in a court
of law, the decision as to who will be the owner chargeable to income-
tax under section 22 will be of the Income-tax Department till the
court gives its decision to the suit filed in respect of such property.
In case of recovery of unrealized rent and arrears of rent,
ownership of that property is not relevant. (discussed later in
point 2.9)
(iii) Use of property
The property may be used for any purpose i.e., commercial or residential
purpose, but it should not be used by the owner for the purpose of any
business or profession carried on by him, the profit of which is chargeable
to tax.
The income earned by an assessee engaged in the business of letting out of
commercial properties on rent would be taxable as business income1 .
(iv) Property held as stock-in-trade etc.
Annual value of house property will be charged under the head “Income
from house property”, where it is held by the assessee as stock-in-trade of a
business also.
However, the annual value of property being held as stock in trade would
be treated as NIL for a period of two years from the end of the financial
year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is
1Supreme Court ruling in Rayala Corporation (P) Ltd. v. Asstt. CIT (2016) 386 ITR 500
obtained from the competent authority, if such property is not let-out
during such period [Section 23(5)].
Where the assessee is a builder/construction company, the house
property would be its stock-in-trade and rental income therefrom
would be assessable under the head “Income from House
Property”. However, where the assessee is engaged in the business of letting
out of commercial properties, income therefrom would be assessable under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
2.3 COMPOSITE RENT
(i) Meaning of composite rent: The owner of a property may sometimes
receive rent in respect of building as well as –
(1) other assets like say, furniture, plant and machinery.
(2) for different services provided in the building, for e.g., –
(a) Lifts;
(b) Security;
(c) Power backup;
The amount so received is known as “composite rent”.
(ii) Tax treatment of composite rent
Where composite rent includes rent of building and charges for different
services (lifts, security etc.), the composite rent is has to be split up in the
following manner-
(a) the sum attributable to use of property is to be assessed under
section 22 as income from house property;
(b) the sum attributable to use of services is to be charged to tax under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or under the
head “Income from other sources”, as the case may be.
(iii) Manner of splitting up
If let out building and other assets are inseparable
Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other
assets (like furniture) and the two lettings are not separable i.e. the other
party does not accept letting out of building without other assets, then the
rent is taxable either as business income or income from other sources, the
case may be.
This is applicable even if sum receivable for the two lettings is fixed
separately.
If let out building and other assets are separable
Where composite rent is received from letting out of building and other
assets and the two lettings are separable i.e. letting out of one is acceptable
to the other party without letting out of the other, then
(a) income from letting out of building is taxable under “Income from
house property”;
(b) Income from letting out of other assets is taxable under “Profits and
gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”, as
the case may be.
This is applicable even if a composite rent is received by the assessee from
his tenant for the two lettings.
2.4 INCOME FROM HOUSE PROPERTY
SITUATED OUTSIDE INDIA
(i) In case of a resident in India (resident and ordinarily resident in case of
individuals and HUF), income from house property situated outside India is
taxable, whether such income is brought into India or not.
(ii) In case of a non-resident or resident but not ordinarily resident in India,
income from a property situated outside India is taxable only if it is received
in India.
2.5 DETERMINATION OF ANNUAL VALUE
[SECTION 23]
Municipal tax
Determination
paid by the
of Gross Net Annual
owner during
Annual Value Value (NAV)
the previous
(GAV)
year
(i) Determination of annual value for different types of house properties
(1) Where the property is let out throughout the previous year
[Section 23(1)(a)/(b)]
Where the property is let out for the whole year, then the GAV would
be the higher of –
(a) Expected Rent (ER) and
(b) Actual rent received or receivable during the year
♦ The Expected Rent (ER) is the higher of fair rent (FR) and
municipal value (MV), but restricted to standard rent (SR).
♦ For example, let us say the higher of FR and MV is X. Then ER =
SR, if X>SR. However, if X<SR, ER = X.
♦ Expected Rent (ER) as per section 23(1)(a) cannot exceed
standard rent (SR) but it can be lower than standard rent, in a
case where standard rent is more than the higher of MV and FR.
♦ Municipal value is the value determined by the municipal
authorities for levying municipal taxes on house property.
♦ Fair rent means rent which similar property in the same locality
would fetch.
♦ The standard rent (SR) is fixed by the Rent Control Act.
From the GAV computed above, municipal taxes paid by the owner
during the previous year are to be deducted to arrive at the NAV.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Jayashree owns five houses in India, all of which are let-out. Compute the
GAV of each house from the information given below –
Particulars House House House House House
I II III IV V
(`) (`) (`) (`) (`)
Municipal Value 80,000 55,000 65,000 24,000 80,000
Fair Rent 90,000 60,000 65,000 25,000 75,000
Standard Rent N.A. 75,000 58,000 N.A. 78,000
Actual rent received/ 72,000 72,000 60,000 30,000 72,000
receivable
SOLUTION
As per section 23(1), Gross Annual Value (GAV) is the higher of Expected
rent and actual rent received. Expected rent is higher of municipal value and
fair rent but restricted to standard rent.
Computation of GAV of each house owned by Jayashree
Particulars House House House House House
I II III IV V
(`) (`) (`) (`) (`)
(i) Municipal value 80,000 55,000 65,000 24,000 80,000
(ii) Fair rent 90,000 60,000 65,000 25,000 75,000
(iii) Higher of (i) & (ii) 90,000 60,000 65,000 25,000 80,000
(iv) Standard rent N.A. 75,000 58,000 N.A. 78,000
(v) Expected rent 90,000 60,000 58,000 25,000 78,000
[Lower of (iii) & (iv)]
(vi) Actual rent 72,000 72,000 60,000 30,000 72,000
received/receivable
GAV [Higher of (v) 90,000 72,000 60,000 30,000 78,000
& (vi)]
(2) Where let out property is vacant for part of the year
[Section 23(1)(c)]
Where let out property is vacant for part of the year and owing to
vacancy, the actual rent is lower than the ER, then the actual rent
received or receivable will be the GAV of the property.
(3) In case of self-occupied property or unoccupied property
[Section 23(2)]
(a) Where the property is self-occupied for own residence or
unoccupied throughout the previous year, its Annual Value will
be Nil, provided no other benefit is derived by the owner from
such property.
The expression “Unoccupied property” refers to a property
which cannot be occupied by the owner by reason of his
employment, business or profession at a different place and he
resides at such other place in a building not belonging to him.
(b) The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value is available only for upto two
self-occupied or unoccupied house properties i.e., for either one
house property or two house properties.
(c) The benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of upto two self-
occupied house properties is available only to an individual/HUF.
(d) No deduction for municipal taxes is allowed in respect of such
property/ properties as annual value means value determined after
deduction of municipal taxes.
(4) Where a house property is let-out for part of the year and self-
occupied for part of the year [Section 23(3)]
(a) If a single unit of a property is self-occupied for part of the year
and let-out for the remaining part of the year, then the ER for the
whole year shall be taken into account for determining the GAV.
(b) The ER for the whole year shall be compared with the actual
rent for the let out period and whichever is higher shall be
adopted as the GAV.
(c) However, municipal tax for the whole year is allowed as deduction
provided it is paid by the owner during the previous year.
(5) In case of deemed to be let out property [Section 23(4)]
(a) Where the assessee owns more than two properties for self-
occupation, then the income from any two properties, at the
option of the assessee, shall be computed under the self-
occupied property category and their annual value will be nil.
(b) The other self-occupied/ unoccupied properties shall be treated
as “deemed let out properties”.
(c) This option can be changed year after year in a manner
beneficial to the assessee.
(d) In case of deemed let-out property, the ER shall be taken as the GAV.
(e) The question of considering actual rent received/ receivable
does not arise. Consequently, no adjustment is necessary on
account of property remaining vacant or unrealized rent.
(f) Municipal taxes actually paid by the owner during the previous
year, in respect of the deemed let out properties, can be claimed
as deduction.
(6) In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade [Section 23(5)]
(a) In some cases, property consisting of any buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto may be held as stock-in-trade, and the
whole or any part of the property may not be let out during the
whole or any part of the previous year.
(b) In such cases, the annual value of such property or part of the
property shall be Nil.
(c) This benefit would be available for the period upto two years
from the end of the financial year in which certificate of
completion of construction of the property is obtained from the
competent authority.
(7) In case of a house property, a portion let out and a portion self-
occupied
(a) Income from any portion or part of a property which is let out
shall be computed separately under the “let out property”
category and the other portion or part which is self-occupied
shall be computed under the “self-occupied property” category.
(b) There is no need to treat the whole property as a single unit for
computation of income from house property.
(c) Municipal valuation/fair rent/standard rent, if not given
separately, shall be apportioned between the let-out portion and
self-occupied portion either on plinth area or built-up floor
space or on such other reasonable basis.
(d) Property taxes, if given on a consolidated basis, can be
bifurcated as attributable to each portion or floor or on a
reasonable basis.
The following are the circumstances where notional income
is charged to tax instead of real income:
• Where the assessee owns more than two house properties for
the purpose of self-occupation, the annual value of any two of those
properties, at the option of the assessee, will be nil and the other properties
are deemed to be let-out and income has to be computed on a notional basis
by taking the Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV.
• In the case of property let-out throughout the previous year, if the Expected
Rent (ER) exceeds the actual rent received or receivable, then ER is taken as
the GAV.
• In the case of let-out property which is vacant for part of the year, if the
actual rent received or receivable for let out period is less than the Expected
Rent (ER) for whole year not owing to vacancy, then ER for whole year is
taken as the GAV.
• In case of a house property held as stock-in-trade by assessee (which is not
let out), income has to be computed on a notional basis by taking the
Expected Rent (ER) as the GAV after 2 years from the end of the financial
year in which certificate of completion of construction of the property is
obtained from the competent authority.
(ii) Treatment of unrealised rent [Explanation below section 23(1)]
(1) The Actual rent received/receivable should not include any amount of
rent which is not capable of being realised.
(2) However, the conditions prescribed in Rule 4 should be satisfied. They
are –
(a) the tenancy is bona fide;
(b) the defaulting tenant has vacated, or steps have been taken to
compel him to vacate the property;
(c) the defaulting tenant is not in occupation of any other property
of the assessee;
(d) the assessee has taken all reasonable steps to institute legal
proceedings for the recovery of the unpaid rent or satisfies the
Assessing Officer that legal proceedings would be useless.
(iii) Property taxes (Municipal taxes)
(1) Property taxes are allowable as deduction from the GAV subject to the
following two conditions:
(a) It should be borne by the assessee (owner); and
(b) It should be actually paid during the previous year.
(2) If property taxes levied by a local authority for a particular previous
year are not paid during that year, no deduction shall be allowed in
the computation of income from house property for that year.
(3) However, if in any subsequent year, the arrears are paid, then, the
amount so paid is allowed as deduction in computation of income
from house property for that year.
(4) Thus, we find that irrespective of the previous year in which the liability
to pay such taxes arises according to the method of accounting regularly
employed by the owner, the deduction in respect of such taxes will be
allowed only in the year of actual payment by the owner.
(5) In case of property situated outside India, taxes levied by local
authority of the country in which the property is situated is
deductible2.
(6) In respect of self-occupied/unoccupied house property/properties for
which “Nil” Annual Value benefit is claimed, deduction of municipal
taxes paid is not allowable.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Rajesh, a British national, is a resident and ordinarily resident in India during the
P.Y.2024-25. He owns a house in London, which he has let out at £ 10,000 p.m. The
municipal taxes paid to the Municipal Corporation of London is £ 8,000 during the
P.Y.2024-25. The value of one £ in Indian rupee to be taken at ` 95. Compute
Rajesh’s Net Annual Value of the property for the A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
For the P.Y.2024-25, Mr. Rajesh, a British national, is resident and ordinarily
resident in India. Therefore, income received by him by way of rent of the house
2CIT v. R. Venugopala Reddiar (1965) 58 ITR 439 (Mad)
property located in London is to be included in the total income in India.
Municipal taxes paid in London is be to allowed as deduction from the gross
annual value.
Computation of Net Annual Value of the property of
Mr. Rajesh for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
Gross Annual Value (£ 10,000 × 12 × 95) 1,14,00,000
Less: Municipal taxes paid (£ 8,000 × 95) 7,60,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 1,06,40,000
2.6 DEDUCTIONS FROM ANNUAL VALUE
[SECTION 24]
(i) There are two deductions from annual value. They are –
(1) 30% of NAV; and
(2) Interest on borrowed capital
Deductions provided under section 24 are exhaustive.
(1) 30% of NAV is allowed as deduction under section 24(a)
(a) This is a flat deduction and is allowed irrespective of the actual
expenditure incurred.
(b) The assessee will not be entitled to deduction of 30%, in the
following cases, as the annual value itself is nil.
(i) In case of self-occupied properties or
(ii) In case of property held as stock-in-trade and the whole or
any part of the property is not let out during the whole or any
part of the previous year, upto 2 years from the end of the
financial year in which certificate of completion of construction
of the property is obtained from the competent authority.
(2) Interest on borrowed capital is allowed as deduction u/s 24(b)
Interest payable on loans borrowed for the purpose of acquisition,
construction, repairs, renewal or reconstruction can be claimed as
deduction.
Interest payable on a fresh loan taken to repay the original loan raised
earlier for the aforesaid purposes is also admissible as a deduction.
Interest for pre-construction period:
Pre-construction period is the period prior to the previous year in
which property is acquired or construction is completed.
Interest payable on borrowed capital for the period prior to the
previous year in which the property has been acquired or constructed
(Pre-construction interest) as reduced by any part thereof allowed as
deduction under any other provision of the Act, can be claimed as
deduction over a period of 5 years in equal annual installments
commencing from the year of acquisition or completion of
construction.
Interest for the year in which construction is completed/ property
is acquired:
Interest relating to the year of completion of construction/ acquisition
of property can be fully claimed in that year irrespective of the date
of completion/ acquisition.
(ii) Deduction in respect of self-occupied or unoccupied property where
annual value is nil
(1) Under default tax regime under section 115BAC
There would be no deduction on account of interest on loan under section
24(b) under default tax regime under section 115BAC in respect of the
property referred to in section 23(2) i.e., self-occupied or unoccupied
property.
(2) Under optional tax regime (normal provisions of the Act)
(1) In case assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), the assessee will be
allowed a deduction on account of interest (including 1/5th of the
accumulated interest of pre-construction period) as under –
Conditions Amount of Deduction
(i) Where the property is Actual interest payable in
acquired or constructed with aggregate for one or two self-
capital borrowed on or after occupied properties, subject
1.4.1999 and such acquisition to maximum of ` 2,00,000, if
or construction is completed certificate mentioned in (2)
within 5 years from the end of below is obtained.
the financial year in which the
capital was borrowed.
(ii) Where the property is Actual interest payable in
repaired, renewed or aggregate for one or two self-
reconstructed with capital occupied properties, subject
borrowed on or after 1.4.1999. to a maximum of ` 30,000.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Mr. Manas owns two house properties one at Bombay, wherein his
family resides and the other at Delhi, which is unoccupied. He lives in
Chandigarh for his employment purposes in a rented house. For
acquisition of house property at Bombay, he has taken a loan of ` 30
lakh@10% p.a. on 1.4.2023. He has not repaid any amount so far. In
respect of house property at Delhi, he has taken a loan of ` 5
lakh@11% p.a. on 1.10.2023 towards repairs. Compute the deduction
which would be available to him under section 24(b) for A.Y.2025-26 in
respect of interest payable on such loan if he exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Mr. Manas can claim benefit of Nil Annual Value in respect of his house
property at Bombay and Delhi, since no benefit is derived by him from
such properties, and he cannot occupy such properties due to reason of
his employment at Chandigarh, where he lives in a rented house.
He is eligible for deduction under section 24(b) since he has exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) for A.Y.2025-26
`
Particulars
I Interest on loan taken for acquisition of
residential house property at Bombay
30,00,000 x 10% = ` 3,00,000
Restricted to ` 2,00,000 2,00,000
II Interest on loan taken for repair of residential
house property at Delhi
` 5,00,000 x 11% = ` 55,000
Restricted to ` 30,000 30,000
Total interest 2,30,000
Deduction under section 24(b) in respect of (I) and (II) 2,00,000
above to be restricted to
(2) Certificate to be furnished: For the purpose of claiming deduction of
` 2,00,000 as per (b)(i) in the table given above, the assessee should
furnish a certificate from the person to whom any interest is payable
on the capital borrowed, specifying the amount of interest payable by
the assessee for the purpose of such acquisition or construction of the
property or conversion of the whole or any part of the capital
borrowed which remains to be repaid as a new loan.
• The ceiling limit would not apply to let-out/deemed let-out
property: The ceiling limit prescribed for self-occupied property as above
in respect of interest on loan borrowed does not apply to a let out/ deemed
let-out property irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
• Interest allowable on accrual basis: Deduction under section 24(b) for
interest is available on accrual basis. Therefore interest accrued but not paid during
the year can also be claimed as deduction.
In case of let out/ deemed let out property, interest accrued is allowable as
deduction without ceiling limit under both the tax regimes. However, in case of
default tax regime u/s 115BAC, the resultant loss from house property cannot be set
off against income under any other head, whereas, under the normal provisions of
the Act, the resultant loss from house property can be set off against income from
any other head to the extent of ` 2 lakhs.
• Unpaid purchase price would be considered as capital borrowed: Where a
buyer enters into an arrangement with a seller to pay the sale price in installments
along with interest due thereon, the seller becomes the lender in relation to the
unpaid purchase price and the buyer becomes the borrower. In such a case, unpaid
purchase price can be treated as capital borrowed for acquiring property and
interest paid thereon can be allowed as deduction under section 24.
• Interest on unpaid interest is not deductible.
Deductions from Net Annual Value under default tax regime
under section 115BAC
Deductions allowed from NAV
Let out/ deemed let out Self occupied property/
property properties
Standard deduction u/s Interest on borrowed capital No deduction is
24(a) u/s 24(b) allowable u/s 24
30% of NAV Fully Allowed
Deductions from Net Annual Value under optional tax regime
(normal provisions of the Act)
Deductions allowed from NAV
Let out/ deemed let Self occupied property/
out property properties
Interest on borrowed
Standard Interest on capital u/s 24(b)
deduction borrowed capital
u/s 24(a) u/s 24(b)
where loan is taken for where loan is taken for
30% of repair, renewal or acquisition or construction of
NAV Fully reconstruction of house property
Allowed house property
Acquisition or construction
Maximum completed within 5 years from
`30,000 in toto
the end of the FY in which the
for one or two capital was borrowed
self occupied +
properties Certificate from lender
specifying interest payable
No Yes
Maximum Maximum
`30,000in totofor `2,00,000 in totofor
one or two self one or two self
occupied properties occupied properties
2.7 COMPUTATION OF “INCOME FROM HOUSE
PROPERTY” FOR DIFFERENT CATEGORIES
OF PROPERTY
(I) PROPERTY LET OUT THROUGHOUT THE PREVIOUS YEAR
Particulars Amount
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER
ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR
Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable less unrealized rent as
per Rule 4 [See Note below for alternate view]
Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and Actual rent received/
receivable
Gross Annual Value (GAV) A
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous B
year)
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B) C
Less: Deductions u/s 24
(a) 30% of NAV D
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual
without any ceiling limit) E F
Income from house property (C-F) G
Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from
gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted
only after computing gross annual value.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Anirudh has a property whose municipal valuation is ` 1,30,000 p.a. The fair rent is
` 1,10,000 p.a. and the standard rent fixed by the Rent Control Act is ` 1,20,000 p.a.
The property was let out for a rent of ` 11,000 p.m. throughout the previous year.
Unrealised rent was ` 11,000 and all conditions prescribed by Rule 4 are satisfied. He
paid municipal taxes @10% of municipal valuation. Interest on borrowed capital was
` 40,000 for the year. Compute his income from house property for A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of Income from house property of Mr. Anirudh for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Amount in `
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER
ER = Higher of MV of ` 1,30,000 p.a. and FR of 1,20,000
` 1,10,000 p.a., but restricted to SR of
` 1,20,000 p.a.
Step 2 Compute actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable less unrealized 1,21,000
rent as per Rule 4 = ` 1,32,000 - ` 11,000
Step 3 Compare ER of ` 1,20,000 and Actual rent
received/receivable of ` 1,21,000
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and Actual rent 1,21,000
received/receivable
Gross Annual Value (GAV) 1,21,000
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the
previous year) = 10% of ` 1,30,000 13,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 1,08,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV 32,400
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual
without any ceiling limit) 40,000 72,400
Income from house property 35,600
Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from
GAV, then GAV would be ` 1,32,000, being higher of expected rent of ` 1,20,000
and actual rent of ` 1,32,000. Thereafter, unrealized rent of ` 11,000 and municipal
taxes of ` 13,000 would be deducted from GAV of ` 1,32,000 to arrive at the NAV of
` 1,08,000.
(II) LET OUT PROPERTY VACANT FOR PART OF THE YEAR
Particulars Amount
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER
ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR
Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable for let out period less
unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [See Note below for alternate
view]
Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable computed
for the let-out period
Step 4 If Actual rent is lower than ER owing to vacancy, then
Actual rent is the GAV.
If Actual rent is lower than ER due to other reasons, then
ER is the GAV.
However, in spite of vacancy, if the actual rent is higher
than the ER, then Actual rent is the GAV.
Gross Annual Value (GAV) A
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) B
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B) C
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV D
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without
any ceiling limit) E F
Income from house property (C-F) G
Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from
gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted
only after computing gross annual value.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Ganesh has a property whose municipal valuation is ` 2,50,000 p.a. The fair rent is
` 2,00,000 p.a. and the standard rent fixed by the Rent Control Act is ` 2,10,000 p.a.
The property was let out for a rent of ` 20,000 p.m. However, the tenant vacated
the property on 31.1.2025. Unrealised rent was ` 20,000 and all conditions
prescribed by Rule 4 are satisfied. He paid municipal taxes @8% of municipal
valuation. Interest on borrowed capital was ` 65,000 for the year. Compute the
income from house property of Ganesh for A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of income from house property of Ganesh for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Amount in `
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER
Higher of MV of ` 2,50,000 p.a. & FR of ` 2,00,000 2,10,000
p.a., but restricted to SR of ` 2,10,000 p.a.
Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable for let out 1,80,000
period less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 =
` 2,00,000 – ` 20,000
Step 3 Compare ER & Actual rent received/receivable
Step 4 In this case the actual rent of ` 1,80,000 is 1,80,000
lower than ER of ` 2,10,000 owing to vacancy,
since, had the property not been vacant the
actual rent would have been ` 2,20,000
(` 1,80,000 + ` 40,000, being notional rent for
February and March 2023). Therefore, actual
rent is the GAV.
Gross Annual Value (GAV) 1,80,000
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the
previous year) = 8% of ` 2,50,000 20,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 1,60,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 1,60,000 48,000
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual
without any ceiling limit) 65,000 1,13,000
Income from house property 47,000
Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from
GAV, then GAV would be ` 2,00,000, being the actual rent, since the actual rent is
lower than the expected rent of ` 2,10,000 owing to vacancy. Thereafter, unrealized
rent of ` 20,000 and municipal taxes of ` 20,000 would be deducted from GAV of
` 2,00,000 to arrive at the NAV of ` 1,60,000.
(III) SELF-OCCUPIED PROPERTIES OR UNOCCUPIED PROPERTIES
Particulars Amount
Annual value under section 23(2) Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24
Interest on borrowed capital [Allowable only in case the E
assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Interest on loan taken for acquisition or construction of
house on or after 1.4.99 and same was completed
within 5 years from the end of the financial year in
which capital was borrowed, interest paid or payable in
toto for one or two self-occupied properties subject to
a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-
construction interest).
(ii) Interest on loan taken for repair, renovation or
reconstruction on or after 1.4.99, interest paid or
payable in toto for one or two self-occupied properties
subject to a maximum of ` 30,000.
Income from house property -E
However, aggregate interest on borrowed capital allowable under
(i) and (ii) cannot exceed ` 2,00,000
ILLUSTRATION 6
Poorna has one house property at Indira Nagar in Bangalore. She stays with her
family in the house. The rent of similar property in the neighbourhood is ` 25,000
p.m. The municipal valuation is ` 2,80,000 p.a. Municipal taxes paid is ` 8,000. The
house construction began in April 2018 with a loan of ` 20,00,000 taken from SBI
Housing Finance Ltd. @9% p.a. on 1.4.2018. The construction was completed on
30.11.2020. The accumulated interest up to 31.3.2020 is ` 3,60,000. On 31.3.2025,
Poorna paid ` 2,40,000 which included ` 1,80,000 as interest. There was no
principal repayment prior to this date. Compute Poorna’s income from house
property for A.Y. 2025-26 assuming that she has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of income from house property
of Smt. Poorna for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Amount `
Annual Value of house used for self-occupation under Nil
section 23(2)
Less: Deduction under section 24
Interest on borrowed capital
Interest on loan was taken for construction of house on or
after 1.4.99 and same was completed within the prescribed
time - interest paid or payable subject to a maximum of
` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-construction
interest) will be allowed as deduction.
In this case the total interest is ` 1,80,000 + ` 72,000
(Being 1/5th of ` 3,60,000) = ` 2,52,000. However, the
interest deduction is restricted to ` 2,00,000. 2,00,000
Loss from house property (2,00,000)
(IV) HOUSE PROPERTY LET-OUT FOR PART OF THE YEAR AND SELF-
OCCUPIED FOR PART OF THE YEAR
Particulars Amount
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER for the whole year
ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR
Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable for the period let out less
unrealized rent as per Rule 4 [See Note below for
alternate view]
Step 3 Compare ER for the whole year with the actual rent
received/receivable for the let out period
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER computed for the whole year
and Actual rent received/receivable computed for the
let-out period
Gross Annual Value (GAV) A
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous B
year)
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B) C
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV D
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without
any ceiling limit) E F
Income from house property (C-F) G
Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of unrealized rent from
gross annual value. If this view is taken, the unrealized rent should be deducted
only after computing gross annual value.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Smt. Rajalakshmi owns a house property at Adyar in Chennai. The municipal value
of the property is ` 5,00,000, fair rent is ` 4,20,000 and standard rent is
` 4,80,000. The property was let-out for ` 50,000 p.m. up to December 2024.
Thereafter, the tenant vacated the property and Smt. Rajalakshmi used the house
for self-occupation. Rent for the months of November and December 2024 could
not be realisedin spite of the owner’s efforts. All the conditions prescribed under
Rule 4 are satisfied. She paid municipal taxes @12% during the year. She had paid
interest of ` 25,000 during the year for amount borrowed for repairs for the house
property. Compute her income from house property for the A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of income from house property
of Smt. Rajalakshmi for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Amount in `
Computation of GAV
Step 1 Compute ER for the whole year
ER = Higher of MV of ` 5,00,000 and FR of
` 4,20,000, but restricted to SR of ` 4,80,000 4,80,000
Step 2 Compute Actual rent received/receivable
Actual rent received/receivable for the period let 3,50,000
out less unrealized rent as per Rule 4 =
(` 50,000 × 9) - (` 50,000 × 2) = ` 4,50,000 -
` 1,00,000
Step 3 Compare ER for the whole year with the actual
rent received/receivable for the let out period
i.e. ` 4,80,000 and ` 3,50,000
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER computed for the whole 4,80,000
year and Actual rent received/receivable
computed for the let-out period
Gross Annual Value (GAV) 4,80,000
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the
previous year) = 12% of ` 5,00,000 60,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 4,20,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 4,20,000 1,26,000
(b) Interest on borrowed capital 25,000 1,51,000
Income from house property 2,69,000
Note – Alternatively, if as per income-tax returns, unrealized rent is deducted from
GAV then, GAV would be ` 4,80,000, being higher of expected rent of ` 4,80,000
and actual rent of ` 4,50,000. Thereafter, unrealized rent of ` 1,00,000 and
municipal taxes of ` 60,000 would be deducted from GAV of ` 4,80,000 to arrive at
the NAV of ` 3,20,000. The deduction u/s 24(a) would be ` 96,000, being 30% of
` 3,20,000. The income from house property would, therefore, be ` 1,99,000.
In this case, it may be noted that GAV is the higher of Expected rent and
Actual rent, since the Actual rent is lower than the Expected rent due to
self-occupation and not vacancy.
(V) DEEMED TO BE LET OUT PROPERTY
Particulars Amount
Gross Annual Value (GAV) A
ER is the GAV of house property
ER = Higher of MV and FR, but restricted to SR
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the owner during the previous year) B
Net Annual Value (NAV) = (A-B) C
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV D
(b) Interest on borrowed capital (actual without E F
any ceiling limit)
Income from house property (C-F) G
ILLUSTRATION 8
Ganesh has three houses, all of which are self-occupied. The particulars of the houses
for the P.Y.2024-25 are as under:
Particulars House I House II House III
Municipal valuation p.a. ` 3,00,000 ` 3,60,000 ` 3,30,000
Fair rent p.a. ` 3,75,000 ` 2,75,000 ` 3,80,000
Standard rent p.a. ` 3,50,000 ` 3,70,000 ` 3,75,000
Date of completion/purchase 31.3.2000 31.3.2002 01.4.2016
Municipal taxes paid during the year 12% 8% 6%
Interest on money borrowed for repair of - ` 55,000
property during the current year
Interest for current year on money ` 1,75,000
borrowed in April, 2017 for purchase of
property
Compute Ganesh’s income from house property for A.Y.2025-26 and suggest which
houses should be opted by Ganesh to be assessed as self-occupied so that his tax
liability is minimum.
SOLUTION
Let us first calculate the income from each house property assuming that they are
deemed to be let out.
Computation of income from house property of Ganesh for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Amount in `
House I House II House III
Gross Annual Value (GAV)
ER is the GAV of house property
ER = Higher of MV and FR, but 3,50,000 3,60,000 3,75,000
restricted to SR
Less: Municipal taxes (paid by the 36,000 28,800 19,800
owner during the previous year)
Net Annual Value (NAV) 3,14,000 3,31,200 3,55,200
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV 94,200 99,360 1,06,560
(b) Interest on borrowed capital - 55,000 1,75,000
Income from house property 2,19,800 1,76,840 73,640
Ganesh can opt to treat any two of the above house properties as self-occupied.
Under default tax regime under section 115BAC
OPTION 1 (House I and II– self-occupied and House III – deemed to be let out)
If House I and II are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Self-occupied) Nil
House II (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction) Nil
House III (Deemed to be let-out) 73,640
Income from house property 73,640
OPTION 2 (House I and III – self-occupied and House II – deemed to be let out)
If House I and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Self-occupied) Nil
House II (Deemed to be let-out) 1,76,840
House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction) Nil
Income from house property 1,76,840
OPTION 3 (House II and III –self-occupied and House I – deemed to be let out)
If House II and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Deemed to be let-out) 2,19,800
House II (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction) -
House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction) -
Income from house property 2,19,800
Since Option 1 is most beneficial, Ganesh should opt to treat House I and II as
self-occupied and House III as deemed to be let out. His income from house
property would be ` 73,640 for the A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
If Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)
OPTION 1 (House I and II– self-occupied and House III – deemed to be let out)
If House I and II are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Self-occupied) Nil
House II (Self-occupied) (Interest deduction restricted to ` 30,000) (30,000)
House III (Deemed to be let-out) 73,640
Income from house property 43,640
OPTION 2 (House I and III – self-occupied and House II – deemed to be let out)
If House I and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Self-occupied) Nil
House II (Deemed to be let-out) 1,76,840
House III (Self-occupied) (1,75,000)
Income from house property 1,840
OPTION 3 (House II and III –self-occupied and House I – deemed to be let out)
If House II and III are opted to be self-occupied, the income from house property
shall be –
Particulars Amount in `
House I (Deemed to be let-out) 2,19,800
House II (Self-occupied) (Interest deduction (30,000)
restricted to ` 30,000)
House III (Self-occupied) (No interest deduction) (1,75,000)
(Total interest deduction restricted to ` 2,00,000) (2,00,000)
Income from house property 19,800
Since Option 2 is most beneficial in this case, Ganesh should opt to treat House I
and III as self-occupied and House II as deemed to be let out. His income from
house property would be ` 1,840 for the A.Y. 2025-26 under the optional tax
regime i.e., the normal provisions of the Act.
(VI) HOUSE PROPERTY, A PORTION LET OUT AND A PORTION SELF-
OCCUPIED
ILLUSTRATION 9
Prem owns a house in Madras. During the previous year 2024-25, 2/3rd portion of
the house was self-occupied and 1/3rd portion was let out for residential purposes at
a rent of ` 8,000 p.m. Municipal value of the property is ` 3,00,000 p.a., fair rent is
` 2,70,000 p.a. and standard rent is ` 3,30,000 p.a. He paid municipal taxes @10%
of municipal value during the year. A loan of ` 25,00,000 was taken by him during
the year 2020 for acquiring the property. Interest on loan paid during the previous
year 2024-25 was ` 1,20,000. Compute Prem’s income from house property for the
A.Y.2025-26 assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
What would be Prem’s income from house property under the default tax regime?
SOLUTION
There are two units of the house. Unit I with 2/3rd area is used by Prem for self-
occupation throughout the year and no other benefit is derived from that unit,
hence it will be treated as self-occupied and its annual value will be Nil. Unit 2
with 1/3rd area is let-out throughout the previous year and its annual value has to
be determined as per section 23(1).
Computation of income from house property of Mr. Prem for A.Y.2025-26
under the optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)
Particulars Amount in `
Unit I (2/3rd area – self-occupied)
Annual Value Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24(b)
2/3rd of ` 1,20,000 80,000
Income from Unit I (self-occupied) (80,000)
Unit II (1/3rd area – let out)
Computation of GAV
Step I Compute ER
ER = Higher of MV and FR, restricted to SR 1,00,000
However, in this case, SR of ` 1,10,000 (1/3rd of
` 3,30,000) is more than the higher of MV of
` 1,00,000 (1/3rd of ` 3,00,000) and FR of
` 90,000 (1/3rd of ` 2,70,000). Hence the higher
of MV and FR is the ER. In this case, it is the MV.
Step 2 Compute actual rent received/ receivable 96,000
` 8,000×12 = ` 96,000
Step 3 Compare ER and Actual rent received/receivable
Step 4 GAV is the higher of ER and actual rent 1,00,000
received/receivable i.e. higher of ` 1,00,000 and
` 96,000
Gross Annual Value(GAV) 1,00,000
Less: Municipal taxes paid by the owner during the
previous year relating to let-out portion
1/3rd of (10% of ` 3,00,000) = ` 30,000/3 = ` 10,000 10,000
Net Annual Value(NAV) 90,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV = 30% of ` 90,000 27,000
(b) Interest paid on borrowed capital (relating
to let out portion) 1/3rdof ` 1,20,000 40,000 67,000
Income from Unit II (let-out) 23,000
Loss under the head “Income from house property” = (` 80,000) +
` 23,000 = (` 57,000)
Under the default tax regime, Prem would not be entitled to interest deduction of
` 80,000 under section 24(b) in respect of self-occupied portion (Unit 1). Hence,
income from house property would be ` 23,000, being income from Unit II, which
is let out.
2.8 INADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTION 25]
Interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside India shall not be
deducted if –
(a) tax has not been paid or deducted from such interest and
(b) in respect of which there is no person in India who may be treated as an agent3.
2.9 PROVISION FOR ARREARS OF RENT AND
UNREALIZED RENT RECEIVED
SUBSEQUENTLY [SECTION 25A]
(i) As per section 25A(1), the amount of rent received in arrears from a tenant or
the amount of unrealised rent realised subsequently from a tenant by an
assessee shall be deemed to be income from house property in the financial
year in which such rent is received or realised, and shall be included in the total
income of the assessee under the head “Income from house property”, whether
the assessee is the owner of the property or not in that financial year.
(ii) Section 25A(2) provides a deduction of 30% of arrears of rent or unrealised
rent realised subsequently by the assessee.
(iii) Summary:
Section 25A
Arrears of Rent / Unrealised Rent
(i) Taxable in the year of receipt/realisation
(ii) Deduction@30% of rent received/realised
(iii) Taxable even if assessee is not the owner of the property in the
financial year of receipt/realisation.
3under section 163
ILLUSTRATION 10
Mr. Anand sold his residential house property in March, 2024.
In June, 2024, he recovered rent of ` 10,000 from Mr. Gaurav, to whom he had let
out his house for two years from April 2018 to March 2020. He could not realise two
months rent of ` 20,000 from him and to that extent his actual rent was reduced
while computing income from house property for A.Y.2020-21.
Further, he had let out his property from April, 2020 to February, 2024 to Mr. Satish.
In April, 2022, he had increased the rent from ` 12,000 to ` 15,000 per month and
the same was a subject matter of dispute. In September, 2024, the matter was
finally settled and Mr. Anand received ` 69,000 as arrears of rent for the period
April 2022 to February, 2024.
Would the recovery of unrealised rent and arrears of rent be taxable in the hands of
Mr. Anand, and if so in which year?
SOLUTION
Since the unrealised rent was recovered in the P.Y.2024-25, the same would be
taxable in the A.Y.2025-26 under section 25A, irrespective of the fact that
Mr. Anand was not the owner of the house in that year. Further, the arrears of
rent was also received in the P.Y.2024-25, and hence the same would be taxable
in the A.Y.2025-26 under section 25A, even though Mr. Anand was not the owner
of the house in that year. A deduction of 30% of unrealised rent recovered and
arrears of rent would be allowed while computing income from house property of
Mr. Anand for A.Y.2025-26.
Computation of income from house property of Mr. Anand for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
(i) Unrealised rent recovered 10,000
(ii) Arrears of rent received 69,000
79,000
Less: Deduction@30% 23,700
Income from house property 55,300
2.10 TREATMENT OF INCOME FROM CO-
OWNED PROPERTY [SECTION 26]
(i) Where property is owned by two or more persons, whose shares are
definite and ascertainable, then the income from such property cannot be
taxed as income of an AOP.
(ii) The share income of each such co-owner should be determined in
accordance with sections 22 to 25 and included in his individual
assessment.
(iii) Where the house property owned by co-owners is self occupied by each of
the co-owners, the annual value of the property of each co-owner will be
Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000 /
` 2,00,000, as the case may be, under section 24(b) on account of interest
on borrowed capital if they exercise the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
However, the aggregate deduction of interest to each co-owner in respect
of interest payable on loan taken for co-owned house property and
interest, if any, payable on loan taken for another self-occupied property
owned by him cannot exceed ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, as the case may be.
(iv) Where the house property owned by co-owners is let out, the income from
such property shall be computed as if the property is owned by one owner
and thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned amongst
each co-owner as per their specific share.
(v) Summary:
Co-owned property [Section 26]
Self-occupied property Let-out property
The annual value of the property of each co- The income from such
owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be property shall be
entitled to a deduction of ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, computed as if the
as the case may be, on account of interest on property is owned by one
borrowed capital if they exercise the option of owner and thereafter the
shifting out of the default tax regime provided income so computed shall
under section 115BAC(1A). be apportioned amongst
However, if the co-owner owns another self- each co-owner as per
occupied/unoccupied property, the aggregate their specific share.
interest from the co-owned property and the
other self-occupied property cannot exceed
` 30,000/` 2,00,000, as the case may be.
As mentioned earlier, no interest deduction in
respect of self-occupied property would be
allowable to the co-owners under the default
tax regime.
ILLUSTRATION 11
Ms. Aparna co-owns a residential house property in Calcutta along with her sister
Ms. Dimple, where her sister’s family resides. Both of them have equal share in the
property and the same is used by them for self-occupation. Interest is payable in
respect of loan of ` 50,00,000@10% taken on 1.4.2023 for acquisition of such
property. In addition, Ms. Aparna owns a flat in Pune in which she and her parents
reside. She has taken a loan of ` 3,00,000@12% on 1.10.2023 for repairs of this flat.
Compute the deduction which would be available to Ms. Aparna and Ms. Dimple
under section 24(b) for A.Y.2025-26, if both exercise the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) available to Ms. Aparna for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
I Interest on loan taken for acquisition of residential house
property at Calcutta
` 50,00,000 x 10% = ` 5,00,000
Ms. Aparna’s share = 50% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 2,50,000
Restricted to ` 2,00,000 2,00,000
II Interest on loan taken for repair of flat at Pune
` 3,00,000 x 12% = ` 36,000
Restricted to ` 30,000 30,000
Total interest 2,30,000
Deduction under section 24(b) in respect of (I) and (II) above to be 2,00,000
restricted to
Computation of deduction u/s 24(b) available to Ms. Dimple for A.Y.2025-26
`
Particulars
Interest on loan taken for acquisition of residential house property
at Calcutta
` 50,00,000 x 10% = ` 5,00,000
Ms. Dimple’s share = 50% of ` 5,00,000 = ` 2,50,000
Restricted to ` 2,00,000 2,00,000
Deduction under section 24(b) 2,00,000
2.11 DEEMED OWNERSHIP [SECTION 27]
As per section 27, the following persons, though not legal owners of a property,
are deemed to be the owners for the purposes of section 22 to 26.
(i) Transfer to a spouse [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house property
by an individual to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate
consideration, the transferor is deemed to be the owner of the transferred
property.
Exception – In case of transfer to spouse in connection with an agreement to
live apart, the transferor will not be deemed to be the owner. The transferee
will be the owner of the house property.
(ii) Transfer to a minor child [Section 27(i)] – In case of transfer of house
property by an individual to his or her minor child otherwise than for
adequate consideration, the transferor would be deemed to be owner of the
house property transferred.
Exception – In case of transfer to a minor married daughter, the transferor is
not deemed to be the owner.
Note - Where cash is transferred to spouse/minor child and the transferee
acquires property out of such cash, then, the transferor shall not be treated as
deemed owner of the property. However, clubbing provisions will be attracted.
(iii) Holder of an impartible estate [Section 27(ii)] – The impartible estate is a
property which is not legally divisible. The holder of an impartible estate shall
be deemed to be the individual owner of all properties comprised in the estate.
After enactment of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, all the properties
comprised in an impartible estate by custom is to be assessed in the status
of a HUF. However, section 27(ii) will continue to be applicable in relation to
impartible estates by grant or covenant.
(iv) Member of a co-operative society etc. [Section 27(iii)] – A member of a
co-operative society, company or other association of persons to whom a
building or part thereof is allotted or leased under a House Building Scheme
of a society/company/association, shall be deemed to be owner of that
building or part thereof allotted to him although the co-operative
society/company/ association is the legal owner of that building.
(v) Person in possession of a property [Section 27(iiia)] – A person who is
allowed to take or retain the possession of any building or part thereof in
part performance of a contract of the nature referred to in section 53A of
the Transfer of Property Act shall be the deemed owner of that house
property. This would include cases where the –
(1) possession of property has been handed over to the buyer
(2) sale consideration has been paid or promised to be paid to the seller
by the buyer
(3) sale deed has not been executed in favour of the buyer, although
certain other documents like power of attorney/agreement to sell/will
etc. have been executed.
In all the above cases, the buyer would be deemed to be the owner of the
property although it is not registered in his name.
(vi) Person having right in a property for a period not less than 12 years
[Section 27(iiib)] – A person who acquires any rights in or with respect to
any building or part thereof, by virtue of any transaction as is referred to in
section 269UA(f) i.e. transfer by way of lease for not less than 12 years, shall
be deemed to be the owner of that building or part thereof.
Exception – In case the person acquiring any rights by way of lease from
month to month or for a period not exceeding one year, such person will not
be deemed to be the owner.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Section Contents
22 Basis of Charge
The annual value of any property comprising of buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto, of which the assessee is the owner, is
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house property”.
(i) Property should consist of any buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto
Income from letting out of vacant land is, however, taxable
under the head “Income from other sources” or “Profits and
gains from business or profession”, as the case may be.
(ii) Assessee must be the owner of the property
(iii) The property may be used for any purpose, but it should not
be used by the owner for the purpose of any business or
profession carried on by him, the profit of which is
chargeable to tax.
Further, the income earned by an assessee engaged in the
business of letting out of commercial properties on rent
would be taxable as business income.
(iv) Property held as stock-in-trade etc.
Annual value of house property will be charged under the
head “Income from house property”, where it is held by the
assessee as stock-in-trade of a business also.
23(1) Annual Value of let-out property
Annual value is the amount arrived after deducting the municipal
taxes actually paid by the owner during the previous year from the
Gross Annual Value (GAV). The GAV of let-out property would be
determined in the following manner:
Step 1: Compare fair rent with municipal value
whichever is higher
Compare step 1 value with standard
Step 2: rent
whichever is lower is the Expected Rent
Compare the Expected rent determined
Step 3
above with actual rent
Actual rent > Actual rent <
Expected Rent Expected Rent
Actual rent < Actual rent <
Actual rent
Expected Expected Rent
is GAV
Rent because because of any
of vacancy other reason
Expected
Rent is GAV
23(2) Annual Value of self-occupied property
Where the property is self-occupied for own residence or unoccupied
throughout the previous year owing to his employment, business or
profession carried on at any other place and residing at that other
place in a building not belonging to him, its Annual Value will be Nil,
provided no other benefit is derived by the owner from such property.
An assessee can claim benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of one
or two residential house properties self-occupied by him.
23(4) Annual Value of deemed to be let-out property
If more than two properties are so self-occupied/unoccupied, the
assessee may claim benefit of Nil annual value in respect of any two
properties at his option. The other property(s) would be deemed to
be let out, in respect of which Expected Rent would be the GAV.
23(5) Annual value where the property held as stock-in-trade etc.
Where property consisting of any buildings or lands appurtenant
thereto is held as stock-in-trade and the whole or any part of the
property is not let out during the whole or any part of the previous
year, the annual value of such property or part of the property for
the period upto 2 years from the end of the financial year in which
certificate of completion of construction of the property is obtained
from the competent authority shall be taken as “Nil”.
24 Deductions from Annual Value
1. 30% of Annual Value [Section 24(a)]
2. Interest on borrowed capital [Section 24(b)]: Interest payable on
loans borrowed for the purpose of acquisition, construction,
repairs, renewal or reconstruction can be claimed as deduction.
Pre-construction interest: Interest for the period prior to the
previous year in which property is acquired or construction is
completed.
Pre-construction interest is allowable as deduction in 5 equal
installments from the previous year of completion of construction or
acquisition.
(a) Let out property: Whole of the amount of interest on borrowed
capital payable during the previous year and apportioned pre-
construction interest without any ceiling limit would be allowed
as deduction.
(b) Self-occupied property:
(i) Interest on loan taken for acquisition or construction of
house on or after 1.4.99, where such construction is
completed within 5 years from the end of the financial year
in which capital was borrowed, aggregate interest paid or
payable for one or two self-occupied properties subject to
a maximum of ` 2,00,000 (including apportioned pre-
construction interest).
(ii) In case of loan taken for repair, renovation or
reconstruction at any point of time, aggregate interest paid
or payable for one or two self-occupied properties subject
to a maximum of ` 30,000 (including apportioned pre-
construction interest).
Notes –
(1) Total amount of interest deduction under (i) and (ii) in respect of
one or two self-occupied properties owned by the assessee
cannot exceed ` 2,00,000.
(2) Interest deduction in respect of self occupied property(ies)
would be available only if the assessee exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). If the assessee pays tax under default tax regime
under section 115BAC, deduction under section 24(b) in respect
of interest on loan for self occupied property is not allowed.
25 Inadmissible deductions
Interest chargeable under this Act which is payable outside India
shall not be deducted if –
(a) tax has not been paid or deducted from such interest and
(b) in respect of which there is no person in India who may be
treated as an agent
25A Taxability of recovery of unrealised rent & arrears of rent
received
(i) Taxable in the year of receipt/ realisation
(ii) Deduction@30% of rent received/ realised
(iii) Taxable even if assessee is not the owner of the property in the
financial year of receipt/ realization
26 Co-owned property
(i) Self-occupied property: The annual value of the property of
each co-owner will be Nil and each co-owner shall be entitled
to a deduction of ` 30,000/ ` 2,00,000, as the case may be, on
account of interest on borrowed capital if they exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
However, aggregate deduction of interest to each co-owner in
respect of co-owned self-occupied property and any other self-
occupied house property, if any, cannot exceed ` 30,000/
` 2,00,000, as the case may be.
No deduction would be allowed in respect of interest on loan
taken for purchase/construction/reconstruction/repairs of self
occupied property where the assessee pays tax under the
default tax regime.
(ii) Let-out property: The income from such property shall be
computed as if the property is owned by one owner and
thereafter the income so computed shall be apportioned
amongst each co-owner as per their specific share.
27 Deemed Ownership: The following persons, though not legal
owners of a property, are deemed to be the owners:
(i) Transferor of the property, where the property is transferred to
the spouse or to minor child except minor married daughter,
without adequate consideration
(ii) Holder of an impartible estate
(iii) Member of a co-operative society etc.
(iv) Person in possession of a property
(v) Person having right in a property for a period not less than 12
years
Other important points
(i) The Actual rent received/receivable should not include any amount
of rent which is not capable of being realized i.e., unrealized rent
while determining gross annual value in case let-out property,
provided the conditions specified in Rule 4 are satisfied.
Note - The income-tax returns, however, permit deduction of
unrealized rent from gross annual value. If this view is taken, the
unrealized rent should be deducted only after computing gross annual
value.
(ii) If a portion of a property is let-out and a portion is self-occupied,
then, the income will be computed separately for let out and self-
occupied portion.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Raman is a co-owner of a house property along with his brother holding
equal share in the property.
Particulars `
Municipal value of the property 1,60,000
Fair rent 1,50,000
Standard rent under the Rent Control Act 1,70,000
Rent received 15,000 p.m.
The loan for the construction of this property is jointly taken and the interest
charged by the bank is ` 25,000, out of which ` 21,000 has been paid. Interest
on the unpaid interest is ` 450. To repay this loan, Raman and his brother
have taken a fresh loan and interest charged on this loan is ` 5,000.
The municipal taxes of ` 5,100 have been paid by the tenant.
Compute the income from this property chargeable in the hands of
Mr. Raman for the A.Y. 2025-26.
2. Mr. X owns one residential house in Mumbai. The house is having two identical
units. First unit of the house is self-occupied by Mr. X and another unit is rented
for ` 8,000 p.m. The rented unit was vacant for 2 months during the year. The
particulars of the house for the previous year 2024-25 are as under:
Standard rent ` 1,62,000 p.a.
Municipal valuation ` 1,90,000 p.a.
Fair rent ` 1,85,000 p. a
Municipal tax (Paid by Mr. X) 5% of municipal valuation
Light and water charges ` 500 p.m.
Interest on borrowed capital ` 1,500 p.m.
Lease money ` 1,200 p.a.
Insurance charges ` 3,000 p.a.
Repairs ` 12,000 p.a.
Compute income from house property of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 if he
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
3. Mr. Vikas owns a house property whose Municipal Value, Fair Rent and
Standard Rent are ` 96,000, ` 1,26,000 and ` 1,08,000 (per annum),
respectively. During the F.Y. 2024-25, one-third of the portion of the house
was let out for residential purpose at a monthly rent of ` 5,000. The
remaining two-third portion was self-occupied by him. Municipal tax @11%
of municipal value was paid during the year.
The construction of the house began in June, 2017 and was completed on
31-5-2020. Vikas took a loan of ` 1,00,000 on 1-7-2017 for the construction of
building. He paid interest on loan @ 12% per annum and every month such
interest was paid.
Compute income from house property of Mr. Vikas for the A.Y. 2025-26 if he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
4. Mrs. Rohini Ravi, a citizen of the U.S.A., is a resident and ordinarily resident in
India during the financial year 2024-25. She owns a house property at Los
Angeles, U.S.A., which is used as her residence. The annual value of the house
is $20,000. The value of one USD ($) may be taken as ` 75.
She took ownership and possession of a flat in Chennai on 1.7.2024, which is
used for self-occupation, while she is in India. The flat was used by her for 7
months only during the year ended 31.3.2025. The municipal valuation is
` 3,84,000 p.a. and the fair rent is ` 4,20,000 p.a. She paid the following to
Corporation of Chennai:
Property Tax ` 16,200
Sewerage Tax ` 1,800
She had taken a loan from Standard Chartered Bank in June, 2022 for
purchasing this flat. Interest on loan was as under:
Particulars `
Period prior to 1.4.2024 49,200
1.4.2024 to 30.6.2024 50,800
1.7.2024 to 31.3.2025 1,31,300
She had a house property in Bangalore, which was sold in March, 2021. In
respect of this house, she received arrears of rent of ` 60,000 in March, 2025.
This amount has not been charged to tax earlier.
Compute the income chargeable from house property of Mrs. Rohini Ravi for
the A.Y. 2025-26 if she has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Would your answer change if she pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC?
5. Two brothers Arun and Bimal are co-owners of a house property with equal
share. The property was constructed during the financial year 2016-2017. The
property consists of eight identical units and is situated at Cochin.
During the financial year 2024-25, each co-owner occupied one unit for
residence and the balance of six units were let out at a rent of ` 12,000 per
month per unit. The municipal value of the house property is ` 9,00,000 and
the municipal taxes are 20% of municipal value, which were paid during the
year. The other expenses were as follows:
`
(i) Repairs 40,000
(ii) Insurance premium (paid) 15,000
(iii) Interest payable on loan taken for construction of house 3,00,000
One of the let out units remained vacant for four months during the year.
Arun could not occupy his unit for six months as he was transferred to
Chennai. He does not own any other house.
The other income of Mr. Arun and Mr. Bimal are ` 2,90,000 and ` 1,80,000,
respectively, for the financial year 2024-25.
Compute the income under the head ‘Income from House Property’ and the
total income of two brothers for the A.Y. 2025-26 if they pay tax under the
default tax regime under section 115BAC.
Also, show the computation of income under this head, if they both exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
ANSWERS
1. Computation of income from house property of Mr. Raman for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Gross Annual Value (See Note 1 below) 1,80,000
Less: Municipal taxes – paid by the tenant, hence not Nil
deductible
Net Annual Value (NAV) 1,80,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
(i) 30% of NAV 54,000
(ii) Interest on housing loan (See Note 2 below)
- Interest on loan taken from bank 25,000
- Interest on fresh loan to repay old loan for 5,000 84,000
this property
Income from house property 96,000
50% share taxable in the hands of Mr. Raman
(See Note 3 below) 48,000
Notes:
1. Computation of Gross Annual Value (GAV)
GAV is the higher of Expected rent and actual rent received. Expected
rent is the higher of municipal value and fair rent, but restricted to
standard rent.
Particulars
` ` ` `
(a) Municipal value 1,60,000
(b) Fair rent 1,50,000
(c) Higher of (a) and (b) 1,60,000
(d) Standard rent 1,70,000
(e) Expected rent [lower of 1,60,000
(c) and (d)]
(f) Actual rent [` 15,000 x 12] 1,80,000
(g) Gross Annual Value 1,80,000
[higher of (e) and (f)]
2. Interest on housing loan is allowable as a deduction under section 24
on accrual basis. Further, interest on fresh loan taken to repay old loan
is also allowable as deduction. However, interest on unpaid interest is
not allowable as deduction under section 24.
3. Section 26 provides that where a house property is owned by two or
more persons whose shares are definite and ascertainable, the share
of each such person in the income of house property, as computed in
accordance with sections 22 to 25, shall be included in his respective
total income. Therefore, 50% of the total income from the house
property is taxable in the hands of Mr. Raman since he is an equal
owner of the property.
2. Computation of Income from house property for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
(A) Rented unit (50% of total area – See Note
below)
Step I - Computation of Expected Rent
Municipal valuation (` 1,90,000 x ½) 95,000
Fair rent (` 1,85,000 x ½) 92,500
Standard rent (` 1,62,000 x ½) 81,000
Expected Rent is higher of municipal valuation 81,000
and fair rent, but restricted to standard rent
Step II - Actual Rent
Rent received/receivable for the let out period 80,000
(` 8,000 x 10)
Step III – Computation of Gross Annual Value
The actual rent of ` 80,000 is lower than ER of 80,000
` 81,000 owing to vacancy, since, had the
property not been vacant the actual rent would
have been ` 96,000 (` 80,000 + ` 16,000, being
notional rent for two months. Therefore, actual
rent is the GAV.
Gross Annual Value 80,000
Less: Municipal taxes (5% of ` 95,000) 4,750
Net Annual value 75,250
Less : Deductions under section 24 -
(i) 30% of net annual value 22,575
(ii) Interest on borrowed capital (` 750 x 12) 9,000 31,575
Taxable income from let out portion 43,675
(B) Self occupied unit (50% of total area – See
Note below)
Annual value Nil
Less : Deduction under section 24 -
Interest on borrowed capital (` 750 x 12) 9,000 9,000
Loss from self occupied portion (9,000)
Income from house property 34,675
Note: No deduction will be allowed separately for light and water charges,
lease money paid, insurance charges and repairs.
3. Computation of income from house property of
Mr. Vikas for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Income from house property
I. Self-occupied portion (Two third)
Net Annual value Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24(b)
Interest on loan (See Note below) (` 18,600 x
2/3) [Allowable since he has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime 12,400
provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
Loss from self occupied property (12,400)
II. Let-out portion (One third)
Gross Annual Value
(a) Actual rent received (` 5,000 x 12) ` 60,000
(b) Expected rent ` 36,000
[higher of municipal valuation (i.e.,
` 96,000) and fair rent (i.e., ` 1,26,000)
but restricted to standard rent (i.e.,
` 1,08,000)] = ` 1,08,000 x 1/3
Higher of (a) or (b) 60,000
Less: Municipal taxes 3,520
(` 96,000 x 11% x 1/3)
Net Annual Value 56,480
Less: Deductions under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV 16,944
(b) Interest on loan (See Note
below) (` 18,600 x 1/3) 6,200 33,336
Income from house property 20,936
Note: Interest on loan taken for construction of building
Interest for the year (1.4.2024 to 31.3.2025) = 12% of ` 1,00,000 = ` 12,000
Pre-construction period interest = 12% of ` 1,00,000 for 33 months (from
1.07.2017 to 31.3.2020) = ` 33,000
Pre-construction period interest to be allowed in 5 equal annual
installments of ` 6,600 from the year of completion of construction i.e., from
F.Y. 2020-21 till F.Y. 2024-25.
Therefore, total interest deduction under section 24 = ` 12,000 + ` 6,600 =
` 18,600.
4. (i) Since the assessee is a resident and ordinarily resident in India, her
global income would form part of her total income i.e., income earned
in India as well as outside India will form part of her total income.
She possesses a self-occupied house at Los Angeles as well as at
Chennai. She can take the benefit of “Nil” Annual Value in respect of
both the house properties.
As regards the Bangalore house, arrears of rent will be chargeable to
tax as income from house property in the year of receipt under section
25A. It is not essential that the assessee should continue to be the
owner. 30% of the arrears of rent shall be allowed as deduction.
Accordingly, the income from house property of Mrs. Rohini Ravi for
A.Y.2025-26 will be calculated as under:
Particulars
` `
1. Self-occupied house at Los Angeles
Annual value Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24 Nil
Chargeable income from this house Nil
property
2. Self-occupied house property at
Chennai
Annual value Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24
Interest on borrowed capital 1,91,940
(See Note below)
(1,91,940)
3. Arrears in respect of Bangalore
property (Section 25A)
Arrears of rent received 60,000
Less: Deduction @ 30% u/s 25A(2) 18,000 42,000
Loss under the head "Income from house (1,49,940)
property”
Note: Interest on borrowed capital
Particulars
`
Interest for the current year (` 50,800 + ` 1,31,300) 1,82,100
Add: 1/5th of pre-construction interest (` 49,200 x 1/5) 9,840
Interest deduction allowable under section 24 1,91,940
Interest deduction under section 24(b) is allowable since she has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) Yes, the answer would change if she pays tax under the default tax
regime under section 115BAC. Under the default tax regime, deduction
under section 24(b) for interest is not available. Hence, she cannot claim
deduction of ` 1,91,940 in respect of the Chennai house. Accordingly,
income from house property would be ` 42,000.
5. (i) If Arun and Bimal pay tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC
Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Arun (`) Bimal(`)
Income from house property
I. Self-occupied portion (25%)
Annual value Nil Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24(b) Nil Nil
Loss from self occupied property Nil Nil
II. Let-out portion (75%) – See Working Note
below 1,25,850 1,25,850
Income from house property 1,25,850 1,25,850
Other Income 2,90,000 1,80,000
Total Income 4,15,850 3,05,850
Working Note – Computation of Income from Let-Out Portion of House
Property
Particulars
` `
Let-out portion (75%)
Gross Annual Value
(a) Municipal value (75% of ` 9 lakh) 6,75,000
(b) Actual rent [(` 12000 x 6 x 12) – (` 12,000 x 1 x 4)] 8,16,000
= ` 8,64,000 - ` 48,000
- whichever is higher 8,16,000
Less: Municipal taxes 75% of ` 1,80,000 (20% of ` 9 1,35,000
lakh)
Net Annual Value (NAV) 6,81,000
Less: Deduction under section 24
(a) 30% of NAV 2,04,300
(b) Interest on loan taken for the house [75% of ` 3
lakh] 2,25,000 4,29,300
Income from let-out portion of house property 2,51,700
Share of each co-owner (50%) 1,25,850
(ii) If Arun and Bimal have exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)
Computation of total income for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Arun (`) Bimal(`)
Income from house property
I. Self-occupied portion (25%)
Annual value Nil Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24(b)
Interest on loan taken for construction
` 37,500 (being 25% of ` 1.5 lakh)
[Allowable since they have exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 37,500 37,500
115BAC(1A)]
Loss from self occupied property (37,500) (37,500)
II. Let-out portion (75%) – See Working Note
above 1,25,850 1,25,850
Income from house property 88,350 88,350
Other Income 2,90,000 1,80,000
Total Income 3,78,350 2,68,350
HEADS OF INCOME
UNIT – 1 : SALARIES
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to -
♦ ascertain the point of time when salary income is chargeable to tax;
♦ comprehend the meaning of salary, profits in lieu of salary, allowances,
perquisite and various retirement benefits;
♦ identify the allowances which are exempt and perquisites which are
tax free under default tax regime under section 115BAC and under the
optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act);
♦ determine the taxable portion of retirement benefits, allowances and
other benefits which form part of salary;
♦ determine the value of perquisite chargeable to tax under the head
“Salaries”;
♦ identify the admissible deductions from salary under the default tax
regime under section 115BAC;
♦ identify the admissible deductions from salary under the optional tax
regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)
♦ compute the income chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries” under
both the default tax regime and the optional tax regime.
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” as per
default tax regime under section 115BAC
Particulars Amt
(`)
(i) Basic Salary xxx
(ii) Fees/Commission xxx
(iii) Bonus xxx
(iv) Allowances:
(a) Dearness Allowance [Fully taxable] xxx
(b) House Rent Allowance (HRA) [Fully taxable] xxx
(c) Children Education Allowance [Fully taxable] xxx
(d) Children Hostel Allowance [Fully taxable] xxx
(e) Transport allowance xxx
Less: ` 3,200 per month only in case of blind/
deaf and dumb/orthopedically handicapped
employee xxx xxx
(f) Entertainment Allowance [Fully taxable] xxx
(g) Travelling Allowance/Daily Allowance/ xxx
Conveyance Allowance
Less: Exempt if the amount is fully utilised for the
purpose xxx xxx
(h) Other Allowances including overtime allowance, city xxx
compensatory allowance etc. [Fully taxable]
(v) Taxable Perquisites
(a) Value of rent-free accommodation provided to the xxx
employee*/ Value of any accommodation provided to
the employee at a concessional rate*
I) Where the accommodation is provided by the Govt.
to its employees
License fee determined by the Govt. xxx
Less: Rent actually paid by the employer xxx
*In case of furnished accommodation, the value will be increased by 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture or
hire charges, as the case may be, less amount recovered from the employees.
II) Where the accommodation is provided by any
other employer
If accommodation is owned by the employer
(i) Cities having population > 40 lakh as per
2011 census
10% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
(ii) Cities having population > 15 lakh ≤ 40
lakh as per 2011 census
7.5% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
(iii) In other cities
5% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
If accommodation is taken on lease/rent by the employer
Lower of lease rental paid or payable by the xxx
employer (or) 10% of salary
Less: Rent recovered from the employee xxx
(b) Obligation of employee discharged by employer: For xxx
e.g., Professional tax paid by the employer
(c) Any sum payable by the employer to effect an xxx
assurance on the life of the employee or to effect a
contract for annuity: Actual expenditure incurred by the
employer
(d) Amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made xxx
- in a recognised provident fund,
- in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)
- in an approved superannuation fund
by the employer to the account of the assessee, to the
extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000 in a P.Y.
(e) Annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any xxx
other amount of similar nature during the P.Y. to the
balance at the credit of the recognized provident fund or
NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it
relates to the employer’s contribution which is included
in total income in any P.Y. under section 17(2)(vii)
(f) Value of use of motor car [Refer Table below] xxx
(g) Any other perquisite: For example, xxx
(1) Provision of services of a sweeper, gardener,
watchman or personal attendant: Actual cost to
employer by way of salary paid or payable for such
services (-) amount paid by the employee
(2) Gas, electricity, or water supplied by employer for
household consumption of the employee: Amount
paid on that account by the employer to the agency
supplying gas etc. (-) amount paid by the employee
(3) Provision of free or concessional education facilities
for any member of employee’s household: Sum equal
to the expenditure incurred by the employer (-) amount
paid or recovered from the employee
Where educational institution is maintained and
owned by employer: Cost of such education in
similar institution in or near the locality (-) amount
paid or recovered from employee [However, there
would be no perquisite if the value of benefit per
child does not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.]
Note: Above perquisites in (f) and (g) are taxable only in
case of specified employees.
(4) Interest-free or concessional loan exceeding
` 20,000: Interest computed at the rate charged by SBI
as on 1st day of relevant P.Y. in respect ofl oans for similar
purposes on the maximum outstanding monthly balance
(-) interest actually paid by employee
(5) Free food and non-alcoholic beverages through
paid vouchers
(6) Value of gift, voucher: Sum equal to the amount of
such gift [If value of gift, voucher is below
` 5,000, there would be no perquisite]
(7) Use of moveable assets [Refer table at page 3.88]
(8) Transfer of moveable assets: Actual cost of asset to
employer – cost of normal wear and tear –A mount paid or
recovered from employee [Refer table at page 3.88]
(vi) Leave travel concession [Fully taxable] xxx
(vii) Gratuity
(a) Received during the tenure of employment (fully taxable) xxx
(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10) [Refer fig at Page 3.32] xxx xxx
(viii) Uncommuted pension [fully taxable] xxx
(ix) Commuted pension xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A) [Refer fig at Page 3.29] xxx xxx
(x) Leave encashment
(a) Received during the employment [fully taxable] xxx
(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10AA) [Refer fig at Page 3.36] xxx xxx
(xi) Voluntary retirement compensation xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10C) - Least of the following: xxx xxx
(a) Compensation received/receivable on xxx
voluntary retirement
(b) ` 5,00,000 xxx
(c) 3 months’ salary x completed years of
service xxx
(d) Last drawn salary x remaining months of
service left xxx
(xii) Retrenchment compensation etc. xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10B)] – Least of the following: xxx xxx
(a) Compensation actually received xxx
(b) ` 5,00,000 xxx
(c) 15 days average pay x completed years of
service and part thereof in excess of 6
months xxx
Gross Salary xxx
Less: Deduction under section 16
Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) - amount of salary or xxx
` 75,000, whichever is less
Income under the head “Salaries” xxx
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” under the
optional tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)
Particulars Amt
(`)
(i) Basic Salary xxx
(ii) Fees/Commission xxx
(iii) Bonus xxx
(iv) Allowances:
(a) Dearness Allowance [Fully taxable] xxx
(b) House Rent Allowance (HRA) xxx
Less: Least of the following is exempt [Section
10(13A)] xxx xxx
(i) HRA actually received xxx
(ii) Rent paid (-)10% of salary for the
relevant period xxx
(iii) 50% of salary, if accommodation is
located in Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi or
Chennai or 40% of salary in any other
city for the relevant period xxx
(c) Children Education Allowance xxx
Less: Exempt upto ` 100 per month per child upto
maximum of two children xxx xxx
(d) Children Hostel Allowance xxx
Less: Exempt upto ` 300 per month per child upto
maximum of two children xxx xxx
(e) Transport allowance xxx
Less: ` 3,200 per month only in case of blind/ deaf
and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employee xxx xxx
(f) Entertainment Allowance xxx
(g) Travelling Allowance/ Daily Allowance/ xxx
Conveyance Allowance
Less: Exempt if the amount is fully utilised for the
purpose xxx xxx
(h) Other Allowances including overtime allowance, city xxx
compensatory allowance etc.
(v) Taxable Perquisites
(a) Value of rent free accommodation provided to the xxx
employee†/ Value of any accommodation provided to
the employee at a concessional rate†
I) Where the accommodation is provided by the Govt.
to its employees
License fee determined by the Govt. xxx
Less: Rent actually paid by the employer xxx
II) Where the accommodation is provided by any
other employer
If accommodation is owned by the employer
(i) Cities having population > 40 lakh as per
2011 census
10% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
(ii) Cities having population > 15 lakh ≤ 40
lakh as per 2011 census
7.5% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
(iii) In other cities
5% of salary in respect of the period of
occupation (–) rent recovered from employee xxx
If accommodation is taken on lease/rent by the employer
Lower of lease rental paid or payable by the xxx
employer (or) 10% of salary
Less: Rent recovered from the employee xxx
(b) Obligation of employee discharged by employer: For xxx
e.g., Professional tax paid by the employer
(c) Any sum payable by the employer to effect an assurance xxx
on the life of the employee or to effect a contract for
annuity: Actual expenditure incurred by the employer
(d) Amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution xxx
made –
- in a recognised provident fund,
†In case of furnished accommodation, the value will be increased by 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture or
hire charges, as the case may be, less amount recovered from the employees.
- in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)
- in an approved superannuation fund
by the employer to the account of the assessee, to the
extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000
(e) Annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any xxx
other amount of similar nature during the P.Y. to the
balance at the credit of the recognized provident fund or
NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it
relates to the employer’s contribution which is included
in total income in any P.Y. under section 17(2)(vii)
(f) Value of use of motor car [Refer Table below] xxx
(g) Any other perquisite: For example, xxx
(1) Provision of services of a sweeper, gardener,
watchman or personal attendant: Actual cost to
employer by way of salary paid or payable for such
services (-) amount paid by the employee
(2) Gas, electricity, or water supplied by employer for
household consumption of the employee: Amount
paid on that account by the employer to the agency
supplying gas etc. (-) amount paid by the employee
(3) Provision of free or concessional education facilities
for any member of employee’s household: Sum equal
to the expenditure incurred by the employer (-) amount
paid or recovered from the employee
Where educational institution is maintained and
owned by employer: Cost of such education in
similar institution in or near the locality (-) amount
paid or recovered from employee [However, there
would be no perquisite if the value of benefit per
child does not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.]
Note: Above perquisites in (f) and (g) are taxable only in
case of specified employees.
(4) Interest-free or concessional loan exceeding
` 20,000: Interest computed at the rate charged by
SBI as on 1st day of relevant P.Y. in respect of loans
for similar purposes on the maximum outstanding
monthly balance (-) interest actually paid by
employee
(5) Free food and non-alcoholic beverages: Expenses
incurred by employer (-) amount recovered from
employee [Free food and non-alcoholic beverages
provided during office hours or paid vouchers upto
` 50 per meal is exempt]
(6) Value of gift, voucher: Sum equal to the amount of
such gift [If value of gift, voucher is below
` 5,000, there would be no perquisite]
(7) Use of moveable assets [Refer table at page 3.88]
(8) Transfer of moveable assets: Actual cost of asset to
employer – cost of normal wear and tear –A mount paid or
recovered from employee[ Refer table at page 3.88]
(vi) Leave travel concession xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(5) [Refer table at Page 3.63] xxx xxx
(vii) Gratuity
(a) Received during the tenure of employment [fully taxable] xxx
(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10) [Refer fig at Page 3.32] xxx xxx
(viii) Uncommuted pension [fully taxable] xxx
(ix) Commuted pension xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A) [Refer fig at Page 3.29] xxx xxx
(x) Leave encashment
(a) Received during the employment (fully taxable) xxx
(b) Received at the time of retirement or otherwise xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10AA) [Refer fig at Page 3.36] xxx xxx
(xi) Voluntary retirement compensation xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10C) - Least of the following: xxx xxx
(a) Compensation received/receivable on
voluntary retirement xxx
(b) ` 5,00,000 xxx
(c) 3 months’ salary x completed years of service xxx
(d) Last drawn salary x remaining months of
service left xxx
(xii) Retrenchment compensation etc. xxx
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10B)] – Least of the following: xxx xxx
(a) Compensation actually received xxx
(b) ` 5,00,000 xxx
(c) 15 days average pay x completed years of
service and part thereof in excess of 6 months xxx
Gross Salary xxx
Less: Deduction under section 16
Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) - amount of salary or xxx
` 50,000, whichever is less
Entertainment allowance u/s 16(ii) (only for Govt. xxx
employees)
Least of the following is allowable as deduction: xxx xxx
(a) ` 5,000 xxx
(b) 1/5th of basic salary xxx
(c) Actual entertainment allowance received xxx
Professional Tax/Tax on employment (paid by xxx
employer/ employee) u/s 16(iii)
Income under the head “Salaries” xxx
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Salaries” under
optional tax regime taking Salaries computed as per default tax regime
under section 115BAC as the starting point
Particulars Amt
(`)
Income under the head “Salaries” under default tax regime under xxx
section 115BAC
Add: Deduction under section 16
Difference between standard deduction claimed under default tax xxx
regime i.e., lower of gross salary or ` 75,000 and standard deduction
available under optional tax regime i.e., lower of gross salary or
` 50,000
Less: HRA exempt under section 10(13A) – Least of the three limits xxx
Children Education Allowance (Upto ` 100 per month per child xxx
upto maximum of two children)
Children Hostel Allowance (Upto ` 300 per month per child xxx
upto maximum of two children)
Free food and non-alcoholic beverages through paid vouchers xxx
upto ` 50 per meal
Leave travel concession exempt u/s 10(5) xxx
xxx
Less: Deduction under section 16
Entertainment allowance u/s 16(ii) (only for Govt. employees) xxx
Professional Tax/Tax on employment (paid by employer/ xxx
employee) u/s 16(iii)
Income under the head “Salaries” under optional tax regime xxx
PERQUISITE VALUE OF MOTOR CAR
S. Car Expenses Wholly Partly personal use
No. owned/ met by official
hired by use
1 Employer Employer No
cc of engine Perquisite value
value*
upto 1.6 litres ` 1,800 p.m.
above 1.6 litres ` 2,400 p.m.
If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900 p.m.
should be added to the above value.
2 Employee Employer No Actual amount of expenditure incurred by
value* the employer as reduced by the perquisite
value arrived at in (1) above.
3 Employer Employee -
cc of engine Perquisite value
upto 1.6 litres ` 600 p.m.
above 1.6 litres ` 900 p.m.
If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900 p.m.
should be added to the above value.
*provided employer maintains the complete details of such journey and expenditure thereon and
gives a certificate that such expenditure are incurred wholly for official use.
Perquisite value of motor car is taxable only in case of specified employees
if motor car is provided by the employer to the employee. However, where
the motor car is owned by the employee and used by him or members of
his family wholly for personal purpose and for which employer reimburses the running
and maintenance expenses of the car, the perquisite value of motor car would be taxable
in case of all employees.
• Where car is owned by employer and expenses are also met by the employer, the
taxable perquisite in case such car is used wholly for personal purposes of the employee
would be equal to the actual expenditure incurred by the employer on running and
maintenance expenses and normal wear and tear (calculated @10% p.a. of actual cost
of motor car) less amount charged from the employee for such use.
1.1 INTRODUCTION
The provisions pertaining to Income under the head “Salaries” are contained in
section 15, 16 and 17 in the following manner.
Deduction
(Section 16)
-Standard deduction
-Entertainment allowance$
-Professional tax$
Chargeability
(Section 15) Meaning
-Salary due (Section 17)
-Salary paid or allowed, though -Salary
Income
not due -Perquisite
under the
-Arrears of salary -Profits in lieu of salary
head
"Salaries"
$
Deduction for Entertainment allowance for Government employees and Professional tax are
allowable only under the optional tax regime i.e., if the employee exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The same is not allowable under the
default tax regime under section 115BAC.
Before learning the provisions, it is essential to understand the important concepts
relating to Salaries.
(1) Employer-employee relationship: Every payment made by an employer to
his employee for service rendered would be chargeable to tax as salaries.
Before an income can become chargeable under the head ‘salaries’, it is vital
that there should exist between the payer and the payee, the relationship of
an employer and an employee.
Example: Sujata, an actress, is employed in Chopra Films, where she is paid a
monthly remuneration of ` 2 lakhs. She acts in various films produced by
various producers. The remuneration for acting in such films is directly paid to
Chopra Films by the different producers.
In this case, ` 2 lakhs will constitute salary in the hands of Sujata, since the
relationship of employer and employee exists between Chopra Films and
Sujata.
Example: In the above example, if Sujata acts in various films and gets fees
from different producers, the same income will be chargeable as income from
profession since the relationship of employer and employee does not exist
between Sujata and the film producers.
Example: Commission received by a director from a company is salary if the
Director is an employee of the company. If, however, the Director is not an
employee of the company, the said commission cannot be charged as salary
but has to be charged either as income from business or as income from other
sources depending upon the facts.
Example: Salary paid to a partner by a firm is nothing but an appropriation of
profits. Any salary, bonus, commission or remuneration by whatever name
called due to or received by partner of a firm shall not be regarded as salary.
The same is to be charged as income from profits and gains of business or
profession. This is primarily because the relationship between the firm and its
partners is not that of an employer and employee.
Example: Remuneration received by a Member of Parliament/State Legislature
is not taxable under the head ‘Salaries’ as such person is not a government
employee. Such income would be taxable as ‘Income from Other Sources’.
(2) Full-time or part-time employment: Once the relationship of employer and
employee exists, the income is to be charged under the head “salaries”. It
does not matter whether the employee is a full-time employee or a part-time
one.
If, for example, an employee works with more than one employer, salaries
received from all the employers should be clubbed and brought to charge for
the relevant previous years.
(3) Forgoing of salary: Once salary accrues, the subsequent waiver by the
employee does not absolve him from liability to income-tax. Such waiver is
only an application and hence, chargeable to tax.
Example:
Mr. A, an employee instructs his employer that he is not interested in receiving
the salary for April 2024 and the same might be donated to a charitable
institution.
In this case, Mr. A cannot claim that he cannot be charged in respect of the salary
for April 2024. It is only due to his instruction that the donation was made to a
charitable institution by his employer. It is only an application of income.
Hence, the salary for the month of April 2024 will be taxable in the hands of
Mr. A. He is, however, entitled to claim a deduction under section 80G for the
amount donated to the institution. Deduction under section 80G is available
only if Mr. A exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A). [The concept of deductions is explained in
detail in Chapter 6].
(4) Surrender of salary: However, if an employee surrenders his salary, in the
public interest, to the Central Government under section 2 of the Voluntary
Surrender of Salaries (Exemption from Taxation) Act, 1961, the salary so
surrendered would be exempt while computing his taxable income.
(5) Salary paid tax-free: This, in other words, means that the employer bears
the burden of the tax on the salary of the employee. In such a case, the
income from salaries in the hands of the employee will consist of his salary
income and also the tax on this salary paid by the employer.
However, as per section 10(10CC), the income-tax paid by the employer on
non-monetary perquisites on behalf of the employee would be exempt in the
hands of the employee.
(6) Place of accrual of salary: Under section 9(1)(ii), salary earned in India is
deemed to accrue or arise in India even if it is paid outside India or it is paid
or payable after the contract of employment in India comes to an end.
If an employee is paid pension abroad in respect of services rendered in India,
the same will be deemed to accrue in India. Similarly, leave salary paid abroad
in respect of leave earned in India is deemed to accrue or arise in India.
Section 9(1)(iii) provides that salaries payable by the Government to a citizen
of India for services outside India shall be deemed to accrue or arise in India.
However, by virtue of section 10(7), any allowance or perquisites paid or
allowed outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for rendering
services outside India will be fully exempt. Individual assessees who are not
citizens of India are entitled to the following exemptions in respect of
remuneration/ salary received by them under section 10(6):
(i) Remuneration received by officials of Embassies etc. of Foreign
States [Section 10(6)(ii)]
The remuneration received by a person for services as an official of an
embassy, high commission, legation, commission, consulate or the
trade representation of a foreign State or as a member of the staff of
any of these officials is exempt.
Conditions:
(a) The remuneration received by our corresponding Government
officials or members of the staff resident in such foreign countries
for similar purposes should be exempt.
(b) The above-mentioned members of the staff should be the subjects
of the respective countries represented and should not be engaged
in any other business or profession or employment in India.
(ii) Remuneration received for services rendered in India as an
employee of foreign enterprise [Section 10(6)(vi)]
Remuneration received by a foreign national as an employee of a
foreign enterprise for service rendered by him during his stay in India
is also exempt from tax.
Conditions:
(a) The foreign enterprise is not engaged in any business or trade in
India;
(b) The employee’s stay in India does not exceed 90 days during the
previous year;
(c) The remuneration is not liable to be deducted from the
employer’s income chargeable to tax under the Act.
(iii) Salary received by a non-citizen non-resident for services rendered
in connection with employment on foreign ship [Section 10(6)(viii)]
Salary income received by or due to a non-citizen of India who is also
non-resident for services rendered in connection with his employment
on a foreign ship is exempt where his total stay in India does not exceed
90 days during the previous year.
(iv) Remuneration received by Foreign Government employees during
their stay in India for specified training [Section 10(6)(xi)]
Any remuneration received by employees of foreign Government from
their respective Government during their stay in India, is exempt from
tax, if such remuneration is received in connection with their training in
any establishment or office of or in any undertaking owned by –
(a) the Government; or
(b) any company wholly owned by the Central or any State
Government(s) or jointly by the Central and one or more State
Governments; or
(c) any company which is subsidiary of a company referred to in (b)
above; or
(d) any statutory corporation; or
(e) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860
or any other similar law, which is wholly financed by the Central
Government or any State Government(s) or jointly by the Central
and one or more State Governments. Now, let us discuss the
chargeability under section 15, the provisions explaining the
meaning of Salary, Perquisite and Profits in lieu of salary
contained in section 17 and the deductions under section 16.
Exemption under section 10(6) and 10(7) would be available to an
assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
1.2 BASIS OF CHARGE [SECTION 15]
(i) Section 15 deals with the basis of charge under the head “Salaries”. Salary is
chargeable to tax either on ‘due’ basis or on ‘receipt’ basis, whichever is earlier.
(ii) However, where any salary, paid in advance, is assessed in the year of
payment, it cannot be subsequently brought to tax in the year in which it
becomes due.
(iii) If the salary paid in arrears has already been assessed on due basis, the same
cannot be taxed again when it is paid.
Example: If A draws his salary in advance for the month of April 2025 in the month
of March 2025 itself, the same becomes chargeable on receipt basis and is to be
assessed as income of the P.Y.2024-25 i.e., A.Y.2025-26. However, the salary for the
A.Y.2026-27 will not include that of April 2025.
Example: If the salary due for March 2025 is received by A later in the month of April
2025, it is still chargeable as income of the P.Y.2024-25 i.e., A.Y.2025-26 on due
basis. Obviously, salary for the A.Y.2026-27 will not include that of March 2025.
1.2.1 Advance Salary
Advance salary is taxable when it is received by the employee irrespective of the
fact whether it is due or not. The rule behind this is the basis of taxability of salary
i.e., salary is taxed on due or receipt basis, whichever is earlier.
It may so happen that when advance salary is included and charged in a particular
previous year, the rate of tax at which the employee is assessed may be higher than
the normal rate of tax to which he would have been assessed. Section 89 provides
relief in these types of cases. The concept of relief under section 89 is explained in
this unit later on.
Difference between advance salary and advance against salary
Loan is different from salary. When an employee takes a loan from his employer,
which is repayable in certain specified installments, the loan amount cannot be
brought to tax as salary of the employee.
Similarly, advance against salary is different from advance salary. It is an advance
taken by the employee from his employer. This advance is generally adjusted with
his salary over a specified time period. It cannot be taxed as salary.
1.2.2 Arrears of salary
Normally speaking, salary arrears must be charged on due basis. However, there
are circumstances when it may not be possible to bring the same to charge on due
basis.
Example:
If the Pay Commission is appointed by the Central Government and it recommends
revision of salaries of employees with retrospective date, the arrears received in that
connection will be charged on receipt basis. Here also, relief under section 89 is
available.
Example:
If the Central Government announces an increase in HRA in the P.Y. 2024-25 which
is effective from 1.1.2023, then the arrears from 1.1.2023 to 31.3.3024 will be taxed
in the previous year in which they are paid because they were never due earlier. Here
also, relief under section 89 is available.
1.3 SALARY, PERQUISITE AND PROFITS IN LIEU
OF SALARY [SECTION 17]
Section 17
Perquisite Profits in lieu of salary
Salary [Section 17(1)]
[Section 17(2)] [Section 17(3)]
1.3.1 Meaning of Salary
The meaning of the term ‘salary’ for purposes of income-tax is much wider than
what is normally understood. The term ‘salary’ for the purposes of Income-tax Act,
1961 will include both monetary payments (e.g. basic salary, bonus, commission,
allowances etc.) as well as non-monetary facilities (e.g. housing accommodation,
medical facility, interest free loans etc.).
Section 17(1) defines the term “Salary”. It is an inclusive definition and includes
monetary as well as non-monetary items.
‘Salary’ under section 17(1), includes the following:
(i) wages,
(ii) any annuity or pension,
(iii) any gratuity,
(iv) any fees, commission, perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to any
salary or wages,
(v) any advance of salary,
(vi) any payment received in respect of any period of leave not availed by him
i.e., leave salary or leave encashment,
(vii) Provident Fund:
- the portion of the annual accretion in any previous year to the
balance at the credit of an employee participating in a recognised
provident fund to the extent it is taxable and
- transferred balance in recognized provident fund to the extent it is
taxable,
(viii) the contribution made by the Central Government or any other employer
in the previous year to the account of an employee under a pension
scheme referred to in section 80CCD.
(ix) the contribution made by the Central Government in the previous year,
to the Agniveer Corpus Fund account of an individual enrolled in the
Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 80CCH.
(1) Wages
In common parlance, the term “wages” means fixed regular payment earned for
work or services. The words “wages”, “salary”, “basic salary” are used
interchangeably. Moreover, the payments in the form of Bonus, Allowances etc.
made to the employee are also included within the meaning of salary.
Under the Income-tax Act, there are certain payments made which are fully taxable,
partly taxable and fully exempt. For Example, wages, salary, bonus, dearness
allowance etc. are fully taxable payments. Whereas monetary benefits in the form
of allowances such as House Rent Allowance, conveyance allowance etc. are
partially taxable.
Allowances
Allowances are monetary payments made by the employer to the employees for
meeting specific expenditure, whether personal or for the performance of duties.
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, allowance is taxable on due or receipt basis,
whichever is earlier. These allowances are generally taxable unless some specific
exemption has been provided in respect of such allowance. Various types of
allowances normally in vogue are discussed below:
Allowances
Fully Taxable under Fully Taxable under Fully Exempt only
both regimes default tax regime/ under the optional tax
Partly Exempt under regime
the optional tax
regime
(i) Entertainment (i) House Rent (i) Allowances to High
Allowance Allowance [u/s Court Judges
(ii) Dearness Allowance 10(13A)] (ii) Salary and
(iii) Overtime Allowance (ii) Special Allowances Allowances paid by
[u/s 10(14)] the United Nations
(iv) Fixed Medical
Allowance Except Organization
(v) City Compensatory (a) Travelling (iii) Sumptuary allowance
Allowance (to meet allowance granted to High
Court or Supreme
increased cost of (b) Daily allowance
Court Judges
living in cities) (c) Conveyance
(vi) Interim Allowance allowance
Note – In cases (i) and (iii)
(vii) Servant Allowance (d) Transport
above, the respective Acts
(viii) Project Allowance allowance to
provide for such
blind/ deaf and
(ix) Tiffin/Lunch/Dinner
exemption,
dumb/
Allowance
notwithstanding anything
orthopedically
(x) Any other cash
contained in the Income-
handicapped
allowance
tax Act, 1961. In case (ii),
employee
(xi) Warden Allowance exemption is provided
Note – The exceptions
(xii) Non-practicing under the respective Act,
in (a) to (d) above are
Allowance notwithstanding anything
partly exempt under
(xiii) Transport allowance to the contrary contained
both the tax regimes.
to employee other in any other law.
than blind/ deaf and Fully Exempt under
dumb/ both tax regimes
orthopedically
Allowance granted to
handicapped
Government employees
employee
outside India [Section
10(7)]
(A) Allowances which are fully taxable under both regime
(1) City compensatory allowance: City Compensatory Allowance is normally
intended to compensate the employees for the higher cost of living in cities.
It is taxable irrespective of the fact whether it is given as compensation for
performing his duties in a particular place or under special circumstances.
(2) Entertainment allowance: This allowance is given to employees to meet the
expenses towards hospitality in receiving customers etc. The Act gives a
deduction towards entertainment allowance only to a Government employee
in case he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A). The details of deduction permissible are
discussed later on in this Unit.
(3) Transport allowance: Transport allowance granted to an employee to meet
his expenditure for the purpose of commuting between the place of his
residence and the place of his duty is fully taxable. However, in case of blind/
deaf and dumb/ orthopedically handicapped employees exemption upto
` 3,200 p.m. is provided under section 10(14)(ii) read with Rule 2BB. This
exemption would be available under both regimes.
(B) Allowances which are partially exempt under the optional tax
regime/Allowances which are fully taxable under default tax regime
(1) House rent allowance [Section 10(13A)]: HRA is a special allowance
specifically granted to an employee by his employer towards payment of rent
for residence of the employee. HRA granted to an employee is exempt to the
extent of least of the following, in case such assessee exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):
Metro Cities (i.e., Delhi, Kolkata, Other Cities
Mumbai, Chennai)
1) HRA actually received for the 1) HRA actually received for the
relevant period relevant period
2) Rent paid (-) 10% of salary for 2) Rent paid (-) 10% of salary for
the relevant period the relevant period
3) 50% of salary for the relevant 3) 40% of salary for the relevant
period period
• Exemption u/s 10(13A) would be available to an assessee only
if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided u/s 115BAC(1A). It is not available under the default tax
regime u/s 115BAC.
• Exemption is not available to an assessee who lives in his own house, or in
a house for which he has not incurred the expenditure of rent.
• “Salary” for this purpose means basic salary, dearness allowance, if provided
in terms of employment and commission as a fixed percentage of turnover.
• Relevant period means the period during which the said accommodation was
occupied by the assessee during the previous year.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. Raj Kumar has the following receipts from his employer:
(1) Basic pay ` 40,000 p.m.
(2) Dearness allowance (D.A.) ` 6,000 p.m.
(3) Commission ` 50,000 p.a.
(4) Motor car for personal use (expenses met by the employer) ` 1,500 p.m.
(5) House rent allowance ` 15,000 p.m.
Find out the amount of HRA exempt in the hands of Mr. Raj Kumar assuming
that he paid a rent of ` 16,000 p.m. for his accommodation at Kanpur. DA forms
part of salary for retirement benefits. Mr. Raj Kumar exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
HRA received ` 1,80,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(13A) [Note] ` 1,36,800
Taxable HRA ` 43,200
Note: Exemption shall be least of the following three limits:
(a) the actual amount received (` 15,000 × 12) = ` 1,80,000
(b) excess of the actual rent paid by the assessee over 10% of his salary
= Rent Paid (-) 10% of salary for the relevant period
= (` 16,000×12) (-) 10% of [(` 40,000+` 6,000) × 12]
= ` 1,92,000 - ` 55,200 = ` 1,36,800
(c) 40% salary as his accommodation is situated at Kanpur
= 40% of [(` 40,000+ ` 6,000) × 12] = ` 2,20,800
Note: For the purpose of exemption under section 10(13A), salary includes
dearness allowance only when the terms of employment so provide but
excludes all other allowances and perquisites.
(2) Special allowances to meet expenses relating to duties or personal
expenses [Section 10(14)]
This clause provides for exemption (as per Rule 2BB) in respect of the following:
(i) Special allowances or benefit, not being in the nature of a perquisite,
specifically granted to meet expenses incurred wholly, necessarily and
exclusively in the performance of the duties of an office or employment
of profit [Section 10(14)(i)]
These allowances would be exempt to the extent such expenses are
actually incurred for that purpose. In other words, actual allowance
received, or actual amount spent for the performance of the duties of
an office or employment of profit, whichever is less would be exempt.
(ii) Special allowances granted to the assessee either to meet his personal
expenses at the place where the duties of his office or employment of
profit are ordinarily performed by him or at the place where he
ordinarily resides or to compensate him for the increased cost of living
[Section 10(14)(ii)].
For the allowances under this category, there is a limit on the amount
which the employee can receive from the employer. Any amount
received by the employee in excess of these specified limits will be
taxable in his hands as income from salary for the year. It does not
matter whether the amount which is received is actually spent or not by
the employee for the purpose for which it was given to him.
Rule 2BB
The following allowances have been prescribed in Rule 2BB:
Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(i)
(a) any allowance granted to meet the expenditure incurred on a helper
where such helper is engaged in the performance of the duties of an
office or employment of profit (Helper Allowance);
(b) any allowance granted for encouraging the academic, research and
training pursuits in educational and research institutions (Research
allowance);
(c) any allowance granted to meet the expenditure on the purchase or
maintenance of uniform for wear during the performance of the duties
of an office or employment of profit (Uniform Allowance).
Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(ii)
S. Name of Allowance Extent to which allowance
No. is exempt
1. Any Special Compensatory Allowance ` 800 or ` 300 per month
in the nature of Special depending upon the
Compensatory (Hilly Areas) specified locations
Allowance or High Altitude ` 7,000 per month in Siachen
Allowance or Uncongenial Climate area of Jammu and Kashmir
Allowance or Snow Bound Area
Allowance or Avalanche Allowance
2. Any Special Compensatory Allowance ` 1,300 or ` 1,100 or
in the nature of border area ` 1,050 or ` 750 or ` 300 or
allowance or remote locality ` 200 per month depending
allowance or difficult area upon the specified locations
allowance or disturbed area
allowance
3. Special Compensatory (Tribal ` 200 per month
Areas/Schedule Areas/Agency
Areas) Allowance [Specified States]
4. Any allowance granted to an 70% of such allowance upto a
employee working in any transport maximum of ` 10,000 per
system to meet his personal month
expenditure during his duty
performed in the course of running
such transport from one place to
another, provided that such employee
is not in receipt of daily allowance
5. Children Education Allowance ` 100 per month per child
upto a maximum of two
children
6. Any allowance granted to an ` 300 per month per child
employee to meet the hostel upto a maximum of two
expenditure on his child children
7. Compensatory Field Area ` 2,600 per month
Allowance [Specified areas in
Specified States]
8. Compensatory Modified Field Area ` 1,000 per month
Allowance [Specified areas in
Specified States]
9. Any special allowance in the nature of ` 3,900 per month
counter insurgency allowance
granted to the members of the armed
forces operating in areas away from
their permanent locations.
10. Underground Allowance granted to ` 800 per month
an employee who is working in
uncongenial, unnatural climate in
underground mines.
11. Any special allowance in the nature of
high Altitude allowance granted to
the member of the armed forces
operating in high altitude areas
For altitude of 9,000 to 15,000 feet ` 1,060 per month
For above 15,000 feet ` 1,600 per month
12. Any special allowance in the nature of ` 4,200 per month
special compensatory highly active
field area allowance granted to the
member of the armed forces
13. Any special allowance in the nature of ` 3,250 per month
Island (duty) allowance granted to
the member of the armed forces in
Andaman & Nicobar and
Lakshadweep Group of Islands
Any assessee claiming exemption in respect of allowances mentioned at serial
numbers 7 & 8 and 9 shall not be entitled to exemption in respect of the
allowance and disturbed area allowance referred at serial number 2,
respectively.
(C) Allowances which are partly exempt under both regimes
The following allowances prescribed in Rule 2BB would be exempt under both the
default and optional tax regimes:
Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(i)
(a) any allowance granted to meet the cost of travel on tour or on transfer
(Travelling Allowance);
Explanation - “allowance granted to meet the cost of travel on transfer”
includes any sum paid in connection with the transfer, packing and
transportation of personal effects on such transfer.
(b) any allowance, whether granted on tour or for the period of journey in
connection with transfer, to meet the ordinary daily charges incurred by an
employee on account of absence from his normal place of duty (Daily
allowance);
(c) any allowance granted to meet the expenditure incurred on conveyance in
performance of duties of an office or employment of profit (Conveyance
Allowance);
Allowances prescribed for the purposes of section 10(14)(ii)
Any transport allowance granted to an employee who is blind or deaf and dumb or
orthopedically handicapped with disability of the lower extremities of the body, to
meet his expenditure for commuting between his residence and place of duty would
be exempt upto ` 3,200 per month.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. Srikant has two sons. He is in receipt of children education allowance of
` 150 p.m. for his elder son and ` 70 p.m. for his younger son. Both his sons are going
to school. He also receives the following allowances:
Transport allowance : ` 1,800 p.m.
Tribal area allowance : ` 500 p.m.
Compute his taxable allowances
SOLUTION
Taxable allowance in the hands of Mr. Srikant is computed as under -
If Mr. Srikant exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC
Children Education Allowance:
Elder son [(` 150 – ` 100) p.m. × 12 months] = ` 600
Younger son [(` 70 – ` 70) p.m. × 12 months] = Nil ` 600
Transport allowance (` 1,800 p.m. × 12 months) ` 21,600
Tribal area allowance [(` 500 – ` 200) p.m. × 12 months] ` 3,600
Taxable allowances ` 25,800
If Mr. Srikant pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Children Education Allowance [(` 150 + ` 70) p.m. × 12 months] ` 2,640
Transport allowance (` 1,800 p.m. × 12 months) ` 21,600
Tribal area allowance (` 500 p.m. × 12 months) ` 6,000
Taxable allowances ` 30,240
(D) Allowances which are fully exempt only under the optional tax
regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)
(1) Allowance to Supreme Court/ High Court Judges: Any allowance paid to a
Judge of a High Court and Supreme Court under section 22A(2) of the High
Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and section 23(1A) of the
Supreme Court Judges (Salaries and Conditions of services) Act, 1958,
respectively, is not taxable under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal
provisions of the Act).
(2) Allowance received from United Nations Organisation (UNO): Salary and
Allowance paid by the UNO to its employees is not taxable by virtue of section
2 of the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947. Besides salary,
any pension covered under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act
and received from UNO is also exempt from tax under the optional tax regime
(i.e., normal provisions of the Act).
(3) Sumptuary allowance: Sumptuary allowance given to High Court Judges
under section 22C of the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954
and Supreme Court Judges under section 23B of the Supreme Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 is not chargeable to tax under the optional
tax regime (i.e., normal provisions of the Act)
Note – In cases (1) and (3) above, the respective Acts provide for such exemption,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. In case (2),
exemption is provided under the respective Act, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other law.
(E) Allowances which are fully exempt under both regimes
Allowances payable outside India [Section 10(7)]: Allowances or perquisites paid
or allowed as such outside India by the Government to a citizen of India for services
rendered outside India are exempt from tax.
(2) Annuity or Pension
Meaning of Annuity
• As per the definition, ‘annuity’ is treated as salary. Annuity is a sum payable
in respect of a particular year. It is a yearly grant. If a person invests some
money entitling him to series of equal annual sums, such annual sums are
annuities in the hands of the investor.
• Annuity received by a present employer is to be taxed as salary. It does not
matter whether it is paid in pursuance of a contractual obligation or
voluntarily.
• Annuity received from a past employer is taxable as profit in lieu of salary.
• Annuity received from person other than an employer is taxable as “income
from other sources”.
Pension
Concise Oxford Dictionary defines ‘pension’ as a periodic payment made especially by
Government or a company or other employers to the employee in consideration of
past service payable after his retirement.
Pension is of two types: commuted and uncommuted.
• Uncommuted Pension: Uncommuted pension refers to pension received
periodically. It is fully taxable in the hands of both government and non-
government employees.
• Commuted Pension: Commutation means inter-change. Commuted pension
means lump sum amount taken by commuting the whole or part of the pension.
Many persons convert their future right to receive pension into a lumpsum
amount receivable immediately.
Example:
Suppose a person is entitled to receive a pension of say ` 10,000 p.m. for the rest
of his life. He may commute ¼th i.e., 25% of this amount and get a lumpsum of
say ` 1,50,000. After commutation, his pension will now be the balance 75% of
` 10,000 p.m. = ` 7,500 p.m.
Exemption in respect of Commuted Pension [Section 10(10A)]
As per section 10(10A), the payment in respect of commuted pension is exempt,
subject to the conditions specified therein. Its tax treatment is depicted hereunder:
Pension
Commuted Uncommuted
Fully
Employees of the Central Other Employees
taxable
Government/ local authorities/
Statutory Corporation/ members of
Civil Services/ Defence Services etc. If the employee does
If the employee is in
not receive any
receipt of gratuity
gratuity
Fully exempt u/s
10(10A)(i) 1/2x (commuted
1/3x(commuted pension pension received ÷
received ÷commutation %) x commutation %) x 100,
100, would be exempt u/s would be exempt u/s
10(10A)(ii)(a) 10(10A)(ii)(b)
• Exemption u/s 10(10A) in respect of commuted pension is available
to an assessee irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
• Judges of the Supreme Court and High Court will be entitled to the
exemption of the commuted portion u/s 10(10A)(i).
ILLUSTRATION 3
Mr. Sagar who retired on 1.10.2024 is receiving ` 5,000 p.m. as pension. On 1.2.2025,
he commuted 60% of his pension and received ` 3,00,000 as commuted pension. You
are required to compute his taxable pension assuming:
(a) He is a government employee.
(b) He is a private sector employee and received gratuity of ` 5,00,000 at the time
of retirement.
(c) He is a private sector employee and did not receive any gratuity at the time of
retirement.
SOLUTION
(a) He is a government employee
Uncommuted pension received (October – March) ` 24,000
[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]
Commuted pension received ` 3,00,000
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A) ` 3,00,000 NIL
Taxable pension ` 24,000
(b) He is a private sector employee and received gratuity ` 5,00,000 at the
time of retirement
Uncommuted pension received (October – March) ` 24,000
[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]
Commuted pension received ` 3,00,000
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A)
1 ` 3,00,000 
 × ×100% ` 1,66,667 ` 1,33,333
3 60% 
Taxable pension ` 1,57,333
(c) He is a private sector employee and did not receive any gratuity at the
time of retirement
Uncommuted pension received (October – March) ` 24,000
[(` 5,000 × 4 months) + (40% of ` 5,000 × 2 months)]
Commuted pension received ` 3,00,000
Less: Exempt u/s 10(10A)
1 ` 3,00,000 
 × ×100% ` 2,50,000 ` 50,000
2 60% 
Taxable pension ` 74,000
Exemption in respect of pension received by recipient of gallantry awards
[Section 10(18)]
Any income by way of pension received by an individual is exempt from income-
tax if –
(a) such individual was an employee of Central or State Government and
(b) has been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or
such other gallantry award notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
In case of the death of such individual, any income by way of family pension received
by any member of the family of such individual shall also be exempt under this clause.
“Family”, in relation to an individual, means –
- The spouse and children of the individual; and
- The parents, brothers and sisters of the individuals or any of them, wholly or
mainly dependent on the individual.
Exemption under section 10(18) would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
Exemption of disability pension granted to disabled personnel of armed forces
who have been invalided on account of disability attributable to or aggravated
by such service [Circular No. 13/2019, dated 24.6.2019]
The entire disability pension, i.e., “disability element” and “service element” of
pension granted to members of naval, military or air forces who have been
invalided out of naval, military or air force service on account of bodily disability
attributable to or aggravated by such service would be exempt from tax.
The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that exemption in respect of disability
pension would be available to all armed forces personnel (irrespective of rank) who
have been invalided out of such service on account of bodily disability attributable
to or aggravated by such service. However, such tax exemption will be available
only to armed forces personnel who have been invalided out of service on account
of bodily disability attributable to or aggravated by such service and not to
personnel who have been retired on superannuation or otherwise.
(3) Gratuity
Gratuity is a voluntary payment made by an employer in appreciation of services
rendered by the employee. Now-a-days gratuity has become a normal payment
applicable to all employees. In fact, Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is a statutory
recognition of the concept of gratuity. Almost all employers enter into an
agreement with employees to pay gratuity.
Exemption in respect of Gratuity [Section 10(10)]
Gratuity
Received during Received at the time of
service retirement/Death
Fully
Other
Taxable Received under the
Employees
Pension Code or
Regulations applicable
Covered under the *Not covered under
to members of the
Payment of the Payment of
Defence Service/
Gratuity Act, 1972 Gratuity Act, 1972
Employees of Central
Government/ Members
Least of the
of Civil Services/ local Least of the following
following would be
authority employees etc. would be exempt u/s
exempt u/s
10(10)(ii):
10(10)(iii):
- `20 lakh
- `20 lakh
Fully Exempt -Actual gratuity
-Actual gratuity
u/s 10(10)(i) received
received
-15 days' salary$(based
-Half month salary#
on last drawn salary) for
(based on avg of last
every completed year of
10 months salary) for
service or part in excess
every completed
of 6 months (No. of
year of service
days in a month to be
(fraction to be
taken as 26)
ignored)
*Any death cum retirement gratuity received by an employee on his retirement or his becoming
incapacitated prior to such retirement or on his termination or any gratuity received by his
widow, children or dependents on his death
$ Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance. No. of days in a month
for this purpose, shall be taken as 26.
#Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the terms
of employment for retirement benefits, forming part of salary and commission which is
expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.
• Where gratuity is received from 2 or more employers in the same previous year, then,
aggregate amount of gratuity exempt from tax cannot exceed ` 20,00,000.
• Where gratuity is received in any earlier previous year from former employer and
again received from another employer in a later previous year, the limit of
` 20,00,000 will be reduced by the amount of gratuity exempt earlier.
• It is important to note the difference in definition of “Salary” and the manner of
computation of the third limit in case of employees covered under the Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972 and those not covered for determining the amount of exempt
gratuity.
• Exemption under section 10(10) would be available to an assessee irrespective of
the regime under which he pays tax.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. Ravi retired on 15.6.2024 after completion of 26 years 8 months of service and
received gratuity of ` 15,00,000. At the time of retirement, his salary was:
Basic Salary : ` 50,000 p.m.
Dearness Allowance : ` 10,000 p.m. (60% of which is for retirement benefits)
Commission : 1% of turnover (turnover in the last 12 months was
` 1,20,00,000)
Bonus : ` 25,000 p.a.
Compute his taxable gratuity assuming:
(a) He is private sector employee and covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972.
(b) He is private sector employee and not covered by Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972.
(c) He is a Government employee.
SOLUTION
(a) He is covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act 1972
Gratuity received at the time of retirement ` 15,00,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10)
Least of the following:
i. Gratuity received ` 15,00,000
ii. Statutory limit ` 20,00,000
iii. 15 days’ salary based on last drawn
salary for each completed year of service
or part thereof in excess of 6 months
×last drawn salary × years of service
15
× (50,000 + 10,000) x 27= ` 9,34,615 ` 9,34,615
Taxable Gratuity ` 5,65,385
(b) He is not covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act 1972
Gratuity received at the time of retirement ` 15,00,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10) (Note) ` 8,58,000
Taxable Gratuity ` 6,42,000
Note: Exemption under section 10(10) is least of the following:
(i) Gratuity received ` 15,00,000
(ii) Statutory limit ` 20,00,000
(iii) Half month’s salary based on average salary of last 10 months
preceding the month of retirement for each completed year of service.
i.e. ×Averagesalary×yearsofservice
  10
(50,000×10)+(10,000×60%×10)+1%×1,20,00,000×

1   12
= × ×26
2 10
=` 8,58,000
(c) He is a government employee
Gratuity received at the time of retirement ` 15,00,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10) ` 15,00,000
Taxable gratuity Nil
(4) Fees, commission, perquisites or profits in lieu of or in addition to
any salary or wages
The payment in the form of fees or commission by the employer to the employee
are fully taxable. Commission may be paid as fixed percentage of turnover or net
profits etc.
Section 17(2) and 17(3) contain the provisions relating to perquisites and profits in
lieu of salary, respectively. The provisions of these sections would be discussed in
detail separately in this unit.
(5) Any Advance of Salary
The treatment of “Advance Salary” is already discussed in this unit.
(6) Leave Salary or Leave Encashment
Generally, employees are allowed to take leave during the period of service.
Employees may avail such leave or in case the leave is not availed, then the leave
may either lapse or be accumulated for future or allowed to be encashed every year
or at the time termination/ retirement. The payment received on account of
encashment of unavailed leave would form part of the salary. However, section
10(10AA) provides exemption in respect of amount received by way of encashment
of unutilised earned leave by an employee at the time of his retirement, whether
on superannuation or otherwise.
Exemption of amount received by way of encashment of unutilised earned leave
on retirement [Section 10(10AA)]
The taxability and exemption provisions are depicted hereunder:
Leave Encashment
Received during the Received on retirement, whether on
period of service superannuation or otherwise
Fully Taxable
By a Government employee By any other employee
Fully exempt u/s Least of the following is
10(10AA)(i) exempt u/s 10(10AA)(ii)
` 25,00,000 Leave salary 10 months' salary (on Cash equivalent of
actually received the basis of average unavailed leave (Based on
salary of last 10 months last 10 months average
preceding retirement) salary) to his credit at the
time of retirement
Earned leave entitlement cannot exceed 30 days for every year of actual
service rendered for the employer from whose service he has retired
• Where leave salary is received from two or more employers in the
same previous year, then the aggregate amount of leave salary exempt
from tax cannot exceed ` 25,00,000.
• Where leave salary is received in any earlier previous year from a former
employer and again received from another employer in a later previous year, the
limit of ` 25,00,000 will be reduced by the amount of leave salary exempt earlier.
• Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided
in the terms of employment for retirement benefits and commission which is
expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.
• ‘Average salary’ will be determined on the basis of the salary drawn during the
period of ten months immediately preceding the date of his retirement whether
on superannuation or otherwise.
• Exemption under section 10(10AA) would be available to an assessee irrespective
of the regime under which he pays tax.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Mr. Gupta retired on 1.12.2024 after 20 years of service and received leave salary of
` 5,00,000. Other details of his salary income are:
Basic Salary : ` 5,000 p.m. (` 1,000 was increased w.e.f. 1.4.2024)
Dearness Allowance : ` 3,000 p.m. (60% of which is for retirement benefits)
Commission : ` 500 p.m.
Bonus : ` 1,000 p.m.
Leave availed during service : 480 days
He was entitled to 30 days leave every year.
You are required to compute his taxable leave salary assuming:
(a) He is a government employee.
(b) He is a non-government employee.
SOLUTION
(a) He is a government employee
Leave Salary received at the time of retirement ` 5,00,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10AA) ` 5,00,000
Taxable Leave salary Nil
(b) He is a non-government employee
Leave Salary received at the time of retirement ` 5,00,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(10AA) [See Note below] ` 26,400
Taxable Leave Salary ` 4,73,600
Note: Exemption under section 10(10AA) is least of the following:
(i) Leave salary received ` 5,00,000
(ii) Statutory limit ` 25,00,000
(iii) 10 months’ salary based on average salary of last 10 months
 Salary of last 10 months i.e. Feb. - Nov.
i..e. 10x 
 10 months 
 
(5000×8)+(4000×2)+(60%×3000×10)
= 10×  ` 66,000
 10 months 
(iv) Cash equivalent of leave standing at the credit of
the employee based on the average salary of last
10 months’ (max. 30 days per year of service)
Leave Due = Leave allowed – Leave taken
= ( 30 days per year × 20 years ) – 480 days= 120 days
 
Leave due (in days)
i.e. × Average salary p.m.
 30 days 
 120 days ` 66,000
=  ×  ` 26,400
 30 days 10 
(7) Provident fund
Provident fund scheme is a scheme intended to give substantial benefits to an
employee at the time of his retirement. Under this scheme, a specified sum is
deducted from the salary of the employee each month or at regular intervals as his
contribution towards the fund. The employer also generally contributes the same
amount out of his pocket, to the fund. The contributions of the employer and the
employee are invested in approved securities. Interest earned thereon is also
credited to the account of the employee. Thus, the credit balance in a provident
fund account of an employee consists of the following:
(i) employee’s contribution
(ii) interest on employee’s contribution
(iii) employer’s contribution
(iv) interest on employer’s contribution.
The accumulated balance is paid to the employee at the time of his retirement or
resignation. In the case of death of the employee, the same is paid to his legal heirs.
The provident fund represents an important source of small savings available to
the Government. Hence, the Income-tax Act, 1961 gives certain deductions on
savings in a provident fund account.
Types of Provident Funds
Recognised Unrecognised Statutory
Public Provident
Provident Fund Provident Fund Provident Fund
Fund (PPF)
(RPF) (URPF) (SPF)
(i) Recognised Provident Fund (RPF): Recognised provident fund means a
provident fund recognised by the Commissioner of Income-tax for the
purposes of income-tax. It is governed by Part A of Schedule IV to the Income-
tax Act, 1961. This schedule contains various rules regarding the following:
(a) Recognition of the fund
(b) Employee’s and employer’s contribution to the fund
(c) Treatment of accumulated balance etc.
A fund constituted under the Employees’ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 will also be a Recognised Provident Fund.
(ii) Unrecognised Provident Fund (URPF): A fund not recognised by the
Commissioner of Income-tax is Unrecognised Provident Fund.
(iii) Statutory Provident Fund (SPF): The SPF is governed by Provident Funds
Act, 1925. It applies to employees of government, railways, semi-government
institutions, local bodies, universities and all recognised educational
institutions.
(iv) Public Provident Fund (PPF): Public provident fund is operated under the
Public Provident Fund Act, 1968. Membership of the fund is open to every
individual though it is ideally suited to self-employed people. A salaried employee
may also contribute to PPF in addition to the funds operated by his employer. An
individual may contribute to the fund on his own behalf or on behalf of a minor
of whom he is the guardian.
For getting a deduction under section 80C, a member is required to
contribute to the PPF a minimum of ` 500 in a year. The maximum amount
that may qualify for deduction on this account is ` 1,50,000 as per PPF rules.
A member of PPF may deposit his contribution in as many installments in
multiples of ` 500 as is convenient to him. The amount of contribution may
be paid at any of the offices or branch offices of the State Bank of India or its
subsidiaries and specified branches of banks or any Post Office.
The tax treatment is given below:
During the Employment period
Particulars Recognised PF Unrecognised Statutory PF Public
PF PF
Employer’s Contribution in Not taxable at Fully exempt N.A.(as there
Contribution excess of 12% of the time of is only
salary is taxable as contribution assessee’s
“salary” u/s 17(1) own
contribution)
Employee’s Eligible for Not eligible for Eligible for Eligible for
Contribution deduction u/s deduction deduction u/s deduction
80C, where an 80C, where an u/s 80C,
employee employee where an
exercises the exercises the employee
option of shifting option of exercises the
out of the default shifting out of option of
tax regime the default tax shifting out
provided under regime of the default
section provided tax regime
115BAC(1A) under section provided
115BAC(1A) under section
115BAC(1A)
Interest Amount in excess Not taxable at Fully exempt N.A.
Credited on of 9.5% p.a. is the time of
Employer’s taxable as “salary” credit of
Contribution u/s 17(1) interest
Interest Amount in excess Not taxable at Exempt upto Fully exempt
Credited on of 9.5% p.a. is the time of certain limit of
Employee’s taxable as “salary” credit of contribution
Contribution u/s 17(1) [See interest [See Note
Note below] below]
Amount Exempt u/s 10(12) • Employee’s Exempt u/s Fully exempt
withdrawn subject to certain contribution 10(11) u/s 10(11)
on conditions is not
retirement/ detailed in the taxable.
termination chart below • Interest on
Employee’s
contribution
is taxable
under
‘Income from
Other
Sources’.
• Employer’s
contribution
and interest
thereon is
salary
Salary for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if provided in the
terms of employment for retirement benefits and commission as a percentage of
turnover.
Note - Interest credited on contribution by such person/employee
As per section 10(11), any payment from a Provident Fund (PF) to which Provident
Fund Act, 1925, applies or from Public Provident Fund would be exempt.
Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participating in
a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be exempt under section 10(12).
However, the exemption under section 10(11) or 10(12) would not be available in
respect of income by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent
it relates to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by that
person/employee exceeding ` 2,50,000 in any previous year in that fund, on or after
1st April, 2021.
If the contribution by such person/employee is in a fund in which there is no
employer’s contribution, then, a higher limit of ` 5,00,000 would be applicable for
such contribution, and interest accrued in any previous year in that fund, on or after
1st April, 2021 would be exempt upto that limit.
It may be noted that interest accrued on contribution to such funds upto 31st
March, 2021 would be exempt without any limit, even if the accrual of income is
after that date.
Exemption under section 10(11) and 10(12) would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
The CBDT has, vide Rule 9D, notified the manner to calculate taxable interest
relating to contribution in a provident fund or recognized provident fund,
exceeding threshold limit.
Interest income accrued during the previous year which is not exempt from
inclusion in the total income of a person (taxable interest) shall be computed as the
interest accrued during the previous year in the taxable contribution account.
For this purpose, separate accounts within the provident fund account shall be
maintained during the previous year 2021-22 and all subsequent previous years for
taxable contribution and non-taxable contribution made by a person.
(a) Non-taxable contribution account – Aggregate of
(i) closing balance in the account as on 31.03.2021;
(ii) any contribution made by the person in the account during the
previous year 2021-22 and subsequent previous years, which is not
included in the taxable contribution account; and
(iii) interest accrued on (i) and (ii),
as reduced by the withdrawal, if any, from such account.
(b) Taxable contribution account – Aggregate of
(i) contribution made by the person in the account during the previous
year 2021-22 and subsequent previous years, which is in excess of the
yearly threshold limit; and
(ii) interest accrued on (i)
as reduced by the withdrawal, if any, from such account.
Yearly threshold limit is ` 5,00,000, if the contribution by such person/employee is
in a fund in which there is no employer’s contribution and ` 2,50,000 in other cases.
Exemption of Accumulated balance of RPF, payable to an employee
Has the employee rendered continuous service of at least
5 years with the employer?
YES NO
Are his services terminated due to (i) his ill-health (ii)
Exempt contraction or discontinuance of employer’s business or
(iii) any other cause beyond the control of the
employee?
Yes No
Exempt
Is the entire balance Is the entire balance
standing to the standing to the credit
credit of the No No of the employee
employee Taxable* transferred to his NPS
transferred to his account referred to in
individual account in section 80CCD and
any RPF maintained notified by the Central
with his new Government?
employer?
Yes
Yes
Exempt Exempt
* Where the accumulated balance in RPF becomes taxable, the tax payable in each of the
years would be computed as if the fund had been an URPF and the difference in tax would
be payable by the employee.
Note:
If, after termination of his employment with one employer, the employee obtains
employment under another employer, then, only so much of the accumulated balance
in his provident fund account will be exempt which is transferred to his individual
account in a recognised provident fund maintained by the new employer. In such a
case, for exemption of payment of accumulated balance by the new employer, the
period of service with the former employer shall also be taken into account for
computing the period of five years’ continuous service.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Mr. A retires from service on December 31, 2024, after 25 years of service. Following are
the particulars of his income/investments for the previous year 2024-25:
Particulars `
Basic pay @ ` 16,000 per month for 9 months 1,44,000
Dearness pay (50% forms part of the retirement benefits) ` 8,000 per 72,000
month for 9 months
Lumpsum payment received from the Unrecognized Provident Fund 6,00,000
Deposits in the PPF account 40,000
Out of the amount received from the unrecognised provident fund, the employer’s
contribution was ` 2,20,000 and the interest thereon ` 50,000. The employee’s
contribution was ` 2,70,000 and the interest thereon ` 60,000. What is the taxable
portion of the amount received from the unrecognized provident fund in the hands of
Mr. A for the assessment year 2025-26?
SOLUTION
Taxable portion of the amount received from the URPF in the hands of Mr. A for
the A.Y. 2025-26 is computed hereunder:
Particulars
`
Amount taxable under the head “Salaries”:
Employer’s share in the payment received from the URPF 2,20,000
Interest on the employer’s share 50,000
Total 2,70,000
Amount taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources”:
Interest on the employee’s share 60,000
Total amount taxable from the amount received from the fund 3,30,000
Note: Since the employee is not eligible for deduction under section 80C for contribution
to URPF at the time of such contribution, the employee’s share received from the URPF
is not taxable at the time of withdrawal as this amount has already been taxed as his
salary income.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Will your answer be any different if the fund mentioned above was a recognised
provident fund?
SOLUTION
Since the fund is a recognised one, and the maturity is taking place after a service
of 25 years, the entire amount received on the maturity of the RPF will be fully
exempt from tax.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Mr. B is working in XYZ Ltd. and has given the details of his income for the P.Y. 2024-25.
You are required to compute his gross salary from the details given below:
Basic Salary ` 10,000 p.m.
D.A. (50% is for retirement benefits) ` 8,000 p.m.
Commission as a percentage of turnover 0.1%
Turnover during the year ` 50,00,000
Bonus ` 40,000
Gratuity ` 25,000
His own contribution in the RPF ` 20,000
Employer’s contribution to RPF 20% of his basic salary
Interest accrued in the RPF @ 13% p.a. ` 13,000
SOLUTION
Computation of Gross Salary of Mr. B for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Basic Salary [ ` 10,000 × 12] 1,20,000
Dearness Allowance [` 8,000 × 12] 96,000
Commission on turnover [0.1% × ` 50,00,000] 5,000
Bonus 40,000
Gratuity [Note 1] 25,000
Employer’s contribution to RPF [20% of ` 1,20,000] 24,000
Less: Exempt [Note 2] 20,760 3,240
Interest accrued in the RPF@13% p.a. 13,000
Less: Exempt@9.5% p.a. 9,500 3,500
Gross Salary 2,92,740
Notes:
1. Gratuity received during service is fully taxable.
2. Employers’ contribution in the RPF is exempt up to 12% of the salary i.e., 12%
of [Basic Salary + Dearness Allowance forming part of retirement benefits +
Commission based on turnover] = 12% of [` 1,20,000 + (50% × ` 96,000) +
` 5,000] = 12% of ` 1,73,000 = ` 20,760
3. Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction
under section 80C, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(8) The contribution made by the Central Government or any other
employer in the previous year to the account of an employee under a
pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD
National Pension scheme is a scheme approved by the Government for Indian
citizen aged between 18-70 years. Subscribers of the NPS account contributes
some amount in their account. In case of any employee, being a subscriber of the
NPS account, employer may also contribute into the employee’s account.
Employer’s contribution to NPS account would form part of salary of employees
under section 17(1).
However, while computing total income of the employee-assessee, a deduction
under section 80CCD is allowed to the assessee in respect of the employer’s as well
as employee’s contribution under a pension scheme referred therein. (Deduction
under section 80CCD will be discussed in detail in Chapter 6 – “Deductions from
Gross Total Income”)
Deduction under section 80CCD(2) in respect of employer’s
contribution would be available to an assessee irrespective of the
regime under which he pays tax. However, deduction under section
80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect of employee’s contribution would be available to an
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(9) The contribution made by the Central Government in the previous
year, to the Agniveer Corpus Fund account of an individual enrolled in
the Agnipath Scheme referred to in section 80CCH.
Agnipath Scheme is a Central Government Scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment
of Indian youth in the Indian Armed Forces as Agniveers for four years to serve the
country.
In pursuance of the Government's decision to implement the Agnipath Scheme,
2022, the Competent Authority has decided to create a non-lapsable dedicated
Agniveer Corpus Fund in the interest-bearing section of the Public Account head.
In this account, fixed percentage of monthly emoluments would be contributed by
the Agniveer and matching amount would be contributed by the Central
Government.
The Agniveer Corpus Fund is defined as a Fund in which consolidated contributions
of all the Agniveers and matching contributions of the Government along with
interest on these contributions would be held in their respective accounts.
Central Government’s contribution to Agniveer Corpus Fund account would form
part of salary of employees under section 17(1).
However, while computing total income of an individual enrolled in the Agnipath
Scheme, being the assessee, a deduction under section 80CCH is allowed to the
assessee in respect of his contribution as well as Central Government’s contribution
under Agniveer Corpus Fund referred therein. (Deduction under section 80CCH will
be discussed in detail in Chapter 6 – “Deductions from Gross Total Income”)
Deduction under section 80CCH(2) in respect of Central Government’s
contribution would be available to an assessee irrespective of the regime
under which he pays tax. However, deduction under section 80CCH(1) in
respect of employee’s contribution would be available to an assessee only if he
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
1.3.2 Profits in lieu of salary [Section 17(3)]
It includes the following:
(i) Compensation on account of termination of his employment
The amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee from his
employer or former employer at or in connection with the termination of his
employment.
(ii) Compensation on account of modification of the terms and conditions
of employment
The amount of any compensation due to or received by an assessee from his
employer or former employer at or in connection with the modification of the
terms and conditions of employment.
Usually, such compensation is treated as a capital receipt. However, by virtue of
this provision, the same is treated as a revenue receipt and is chargeable as salary.
Note: It is to be noted that merely because a payment is made by an employer
to a person who is his employee does not automatically fall within the scope of
the above provisions. The payment must be arising due to master-servant
relationship between the payer and the payee. If it is not on that account, but
due to considerations totally unconnected with employment, such payment is
not profit in lieu of salary.
(iii) Payment from provident fund or other fund
Any payment due to or received by an assessee from his employer or former
employer from a provident or other fund other than
- Gratuity [Section 10(10)]
- Pension [Section 10(10A)]
- Compensation received by a workman under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
[Section 10(10B)]
- from provident fund or public provident fund [Section 10(11)]
- from recognized provident fund [Section 10(12)]
- from approved superannuation fund [Section 10(13)]
- any House Rent Allowance [Section 10(13A)],
to the extent to which it does not consist of employee’s contributions or interest
on such contributions.
Note: If any sum is paid to an employee at the time of maturity from an
unrecognised provident fund it is to be dealt with as follows:
(a) that part of the sum which represents the employer’s contribution to the fund
and interest thereon is taxable under the head “Salaries”.
(b) that part of the sum which represents employee’s contribution is not chargeable
to tax as no deduction or exemption was available at the time of contribution.
(c) that part of the sum which represents the interest on employee’s contribution
is chargeable to tax as ‘Income from other sources’.
(iv) Keyman Insurance policy
Any sum received by an assessee under a Key man Insurance policy including
the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy.
(v) Lump sum Payment or otherwise
Any amount, whether in lump sum or otherwise, due to the assessee or received
by him, from any person -
(a) before joining employment with that person, or
(b) after cessation of his employment with that person.
(1) Retrenchment compensation [Section 10(10B)]
The retrenchment compensation means the compensation paid under Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 or under any Act, Rule, Order or Notification issued under any
law. It also includes compensation paid on transfer of employment under section
25F or closing down of an undertaking under section 25FF of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947.
It may be noted that compensation on account of termination and due to
modification in terms and conditions of employment would be taxable as “profits
in lieu of salary”. However, the retrenchment compensation would be exempt under
section 10(10B), subject to following limits.
(a) Amount calculated in accordance with the provisions of section 25F of the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
i.e., 15 days average pay x completed years of service and part thereof in
excess of 6 months
(or)
(b) An amount, not less than ` 5,00,000 as may be notified by the Central
Government in this behalf,
whichever is lower.
Notes:
1. The above limits will not be applicable to cases where the compensation is paid under
any scheme approved by the Central Government for giving special protection to
workmen under certain circumstances.
2. Average pay means average of the wages payable to a workman
- in the case of monthly paid workman, in the three complete calendar months,
- in the case of weekly paid workman, in the four calendar weeks,
- in the case of daily paid workman, in the twelve full working weeks,
preceding the date on which the average pay becomes payable if the workman had
worked for three complete calendar months or four complete weeks or twelve full
working days, as the case may be, and where such calculation cannot be made, the
average pay shall be calculated as the average of the wages payable to a workman
during the period he actually worked.
3. Wages for this purpose means all remuneration capable of being expressed in terms
of money, which would, if the terms of employment, expressed or implied, were
fulfilled, be payable to a workman in respect of his employment or of work done in
such employment, and includes
- such allowances including DA as the workman is for the time being entitled to;
- the value of any house accommodation, or of supply of light, water, medical
attendance or other amenity or of any other service or of any concessional supply
of food grains or other articles;
- any travel concession; and
- any commission payable on the promotion of sales or business or both
However, it does not include
- any bonus;
- contribution to a retirement benefit scheme;
- any gratuity payable on the termination of his service.
4. Exemption under section 10(10B) would be available to an assessee irrespective of
the regime under which he pays tax.
(2) Voluntary Retirement Receipts [Section 10(10C)]
Lump sum payment or otherwise received by an employee at the time of voluntary
retirement would be taxable as “profits in lieu of salary”. However, it would be
exempt under section 10(10C), subject to the following conditions:
Eligible Undertakings - The employees of the following undertakings are eligible
for exemption under this clause:
(i) Public sector company
(ii) Any other company
(iii) An authority established under a Central/State or Provincial Act
(iv) A local authority
(v) A co-operative society
(vi) An University established or incorporated under a Central/State or Provincial
Act and an Institution declared to be an University by the University Grants
Commission
(vii) An Indian Institute of Technology
(viii) Such Institute of Management as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf
(ix) Any State Government
(x) The Central Government
(xi) An institution, having importance throughout India or in any State or States,
as the Central Government may specify by notification in the Official Gazette.
Limit: The maximum limit of exemption should not exceed ` 5 lakh.
Such compensation should be at the time of his voluntary retirement or termination
of his service, in accordance with any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement
or, in the case of public sector company, a scheme of voluntary separation. The
exemption will be available even if such compensation is received in installments.
Guidelines:
The schemes should be framed in accordance with such guidelines, as may be
prescribed and should include the criteria of economic viability.
Rule 2BA prescribes that the exemption under this section would be available to an
employee who has completed 10 years of service or completed 40 years of age.
However, this requirement is not applicable in case of an employee of a public
sector company under the scheme of voluntary separation framed by the company.
The amount receivable on account of voluntary retirement or separation of the
employee must not exceed -
- the amount equivalent to three months’ salary for each completed year of
service or
- salary at the time of retirement multiplied by the balance months of service
left before the date of his retirement or superannuation.
• Where any relief has been allowed to any assessee u/s 89 for any
A.Y. in respect of any amount received or receivable on his voluntary
retirement or termination of service or voluntary separation, no
exemption u/s 10(10C) shall be allowed to him in relation to that A.Y. or any
other A.Y.
• Where exemption for voluntary retirement compensation under section
10(10C) has been allowed in any A.Y., then no exemption thereunder shall be
allowed to him in any other A.Y.
• “Salary” for this purpose means basic salary and dearness allowance, if
provided in the terms of employment for retirement benefits, forming part of
salary and commission which is expressed as a fixed percentage of turnover.
• Exemption under section 10(10C) would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
ILLUSTRATION 9
Mr. Dutta received voluntary retirement compensation of ` 7,00,000 after 30 years 4
months of service. He still has 6 years of service left. At the time of voluntary
retirement, he was drawing basic salary ` 20,000 p.m.; Dearness allowance (which
forms part of pay) ` 5,000 p.m. Compute his taxable voluntary retirement
compensation, assuming that he does not claim any relief under section 89.
SOLUTION
Voluntary retirement compensation received ` 7,00,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10C) [See Note below] ` 5,00,000
Taxable voluntary retirement compensation ` 2,00,000
Note: Exemption is to the extent of least of the following:
(i) Compensation actually received = ` 7,00,000
(ii) Statutory limit = ` 5,00,000
(iii) 3 months’ salary × completed years of service
= (` 20,000 + ` 5,000) × 3 × 30 years = ` 22,50,000
(iv) Last drawn salary × remaining months of service left
= (` 20,000 + ` 5,000) × 6 × 12 months = ` 18,00,000
1.3.3 Perquisites
The term ‘perquisite’ indicates some extra benefit in addition to the amount that
may be legally due by way of contract for services rendered. In modern times, the
salary package of an employee normally includes monetary salary and perquisites
like housing, car etc.
• Perquisite may be provided in cash or in kind.
• Reimbursement of expenses incurred in the official discharge of duties is not a
perquisite.
• Perquisite may arise in the course of employment or in the course of profession.
If it arises from a relationship of employer-employee, then the value of the
perquisite is taxable as salary. However, if it arises during the course of
profession, the value of such perquisite is chargeable as profits and gains of
business or profession.
• Perquisite will become taxable only if it has a legal origin. An unauthorised
advantage taken by an employee without his employer’s sanction cannot be
considered as a perquisite under the Act.
Example: Mr. A, an employee, is given a house by his employer. On 31.3.2025,
he is terminated from service, but he continues to occupy the house without the
permission of the employer for six more months after which he is evicted by the
employer. The question arises whether the value of the benefit enjoyed by him
during the six-month period can be considered as a perquisite and be charged
to salary. It cannot be done since the relationship of employer-employee ceased
to exist after 31.3.2025. However, the definition of income is wide enough to
bring the value of the benefit enjoyed by Mr. A to tax as “Income from other
sources”.
(1) Definition of “Perquisite”
The term “perquisite” is defined under section 17(2). The definition of perquisite is
an inclusive one. Based on the definition, perquisites can be classified in following
three ways:
Types of Perquisites
Perquisites taxable only in
Perquisites taxable in the Tax free perquisites in
the hands of specified
case of all employees case of all employees
employees
(A) Perquisites taxable in the case of all employees
The following perquisites are chargeable to tax in case of all employees:
Rent Free Value of rent-free accommodation provided to the
Accommodation assessee by his employer computed in prescribed
manner [Section 17(2)(i)]. [Refer discussion on
valuation of perquisite]
Exception: Rent-free official residence provided to a Judge of a High Court or to a
Judge of the Supreme Court is not taxable if they exercise the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Concession in rent Value of any accommodation provided to the
assessee by his employer at a concessional rate.
Accommodation would be deemed to have been
provided at a concessional rate, if the value of
accommodation computed in the prescribed manner
exceeds the rent recoverable from, or payable by, the
assessee [Section 17(2)(ii)].
Payment by the employer Amount paid by an employer in respect of any
in respect of an obligation which otherwise would have been payable
obligation of employee by the employee [Section 17(2)(iv)].
Example: If a domestic servant is engaged by an employee and the employer
reimburses the salary paid to the servant, it becomes an obligation which the
employee would have discharged even if the employer did not reimburse the same.
This perquisite will be covered by section 17(2)(iv) and will be taxable in the hands
of all employees.
Amount payable by an Amount payable by an employer directly or indirectly
employer directly or to effect an assurance on the life of the assessee or to
indirectly to effect an effect a contract for an annuity, other than payment
assurance on the life of made to RPF or approved superannuation fund or
the assessee deposit-linked insurance fund established under the
Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1948 or Employees’ Provident Fund
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 [Section
17(2)(v)].
However, there are schemes like group annuity
scheme, employees state insurance scheme and fidelity
insurance scheme, under which insurance premium is
paid by employer on behalf of the employees. Such
payments are not regarded as perquisite in view of the
fact that the employees have only an expectancy of the
benefit in such schemes.
Specified security or The value of any specified security or sweat equity shares
sweat equity shares allotted or transferred, directly or indirectly, by the
allotted or transferred, by employer or former employer, free of cost or at
the employer concessional rate to the assessee [Section 17(2)(vi)]
[Refer discussion on valuation of perquisite].
Amount or the aggregate The amount or aggregate of amounts of any
of amounts of any contribution made
contribution made to the - in a recognised provident fund
account of the assessee - in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1)
by employer - in an approved superannuation fund
- in a recognised by the employer to the account of the assessee, to
provident fund the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000 [Section 17(2)(vii)].
- in NPS
- in an approved
superannuation fund
Annual accretion to the Refer discussion below
balance at the credit of
the recognised provident
fund/NPS/approved
superannuation fund
which relates to the
employer’s contribution
and included in total
income (on account of
the same having
exceeded ` 7,50,000)
Any other fringe benefit The value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as
or amenity may be prescribed by the CBDT [Section 17(2)(viii)].
Rule 3(7) prescribed the following other benefits or
amenity taxable in case of all employees.
- Interest free or concessional loan
- Travelling, touring and accommodation
- Free or concessional food and non-alcoholic
beverages
- Gift, voucher or token in lieu of such gift
- Credit card expense
- Club expenditure
- Use of movable assets
- Transfer of movable assets
- Other benefit or amenity [For valuation, refer
discussion on valuation of perquisite]
Annual accretion to the balance at the credit of the recognised provident
fund/NPS/approved superannuation fund which relates to the employer’s
contribution and included in total income (on account of the same having
exceeded ` 7,50,000)
Any annual accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar
nature during the previous year to the balance at the credit of the recognized
provident fund or NPS or approved superannuation fund to the extent it relates to
the employer’s contribution which is included in total income in any previous year
under section 17(2)(vii) computed in prescribed manner [Section 17(2)(viia)].
In other words, interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature on the
amount which is included in total income under section 17(2)(vii) would also be
treated as a perquisite.
The CBDT has, vide Rule 3B, notified the following manner to compute the annual
accretion by way of interest, dividend or any other amount of similar nature during
the previous year-
TP = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R
Where,
TP Taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the current P.Y.
PC Amount or aggregate of amounts of employer’s contribution in excess
of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s
80CCD and approved superannuation fund during the P.Y.
PC1 Amount or aggregate of amounts of employer’s contribution in excess
of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s
80CCD and approved superannuation fund for the previous year or
years commencing on or after 1stApril, 2020 other than the current P.Y.
TP1 Aggregate of taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the previous
year or years commencing on or after 1stApril, 2020 other than the current
P.Y.
R I/ Favg
I Amount or aggregate of amounts of income accrued during the current
P.Y. in recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD
and approved superannuation fund
Favg (Amount or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of
recognized provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and
approved superannuation fund on first day of the current P.Y. + Amount
or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of recognized
provident fund, national pension scheme u/s 80CCD and approved
superannuation fund on last day of the current P.Y.)/2
Where the amount or aggregate of amounts of TP1 and PC1 exceeds the amount
or aggregate of amounts of balance to the credit of the specified fund or scheme
on the first day of the current previous year, then, the amount in excess of the
amount or aggregate of amounts of the said balance shall be ignored for the
purpose of computing the amount or aggregate of amounts of TP1 and PC1.
ILLUSTRATION 10
Mr. X is appointed as a CFO of ABC Ltd. in Mumbai from 1.9.2022. His basic salary is
` 6,00,000 p.m. He is paid 8% as D.A. He contributes 10% of his pay and D.A. towards
his recognized provident fund and the company contributes the same amount. The
accumulated balance in recognized provident fund as on 1.4.2023, 31.3.2024 and
31.3.2025 is ` 9,81,137, ` 27,43,048 and ` 46,48,555, respectively. Compute the
perquisite value chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. X u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia)
for the A.Y. 2024-25 and A.Y. 2025-26. Prior to 1.9.2022, he was a consultant, whose
professional fees was taxable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
SOLUTION
Computation of perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia) for
A.Y. 2024-25
1. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = ` 7,77,600, being employer’s
contribution to recognized provident fund during the P.Y. 2023-24 –
` 7,50,000 = ` 27,600
2. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(viia) =Annual accretion on perquisite
taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R
= (27,600/2) x 0.111 + 0
= ` 1,532
PC ABC Ltd.’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized provident
fund during P.Y. 2023-24 = ` 27,600
PC1 Nil since employer’s contribution is less than ` 7.5 lakh to recognized
provident fund in P.Y. 2022-23 and there is no employer’s
contribution in P.Y. 2020-21 and P.Y. 2021-22.
TP1 Nil
R I/Favg = 2,06,711/18,62,093 = 0.111
I RPF balance as on 31.3.2024 – employee’s and employer’s
contribution during the year – RPF balance as on 1.4.2023 =
` 2,06,711 (` 27,43,048 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 9,81,137)
Favg Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 1st April,
2023 + Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 31st
March, 2024)/2 = (` 9,81,137 + ` 27,43,048)/2 = ` 18,62,093
Note – Interest on the aggregate of following will also be chargeable to tax during
A.Y. 2024-25 –
(i) ` 2,03,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2022-23]
(ii) ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2023-24]
(iii) interest accrued on ` 2,03,600 being excess employee’s contribution of
P.Y. 2022-23
Computation of perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) and 17(2)(viia)
for A.Y. 2025-26
1. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = ` 7,77,600, being employer’s
contribution to recognized provident fund during the P.Y. 2024-25 –
` 7,50,000 = ` 27,600
2. Perquisite value taxable u/s 17(2)(viia) = Annual accretion on perquisite
taxable u/s 17(2)(vii) = (PC/2)*R + (PC1 + TP1)*R
= (27,600/2) x 0.09479 + (27,600 + 1,532) x 0.09479
= ` 1,308 + ` 2,761 = ` 4,069
PC ABC Ltd.’s contribution in excess of ` 7.5 lakh to recognized
provident fund during P.Y. 2024-25 = ` 27,600
PC1 Amount of employer’s contribution in excess of ` 7,50,000 to RPF in
P.Y. 2020-21, P.Y. 2021-22 and P.Y. 2022-23 = ` 27,600
TP1 Taxable perquisite under section 17(2)(viia) for the P.Y. 2023-24 =
` 1,532
R I/Favg = 3,50,307/36,95,802 = 0.09479
I RPF balance as on 31.3.2025 – employee’s and employer’s
contribution during the year – RPF balance as on 1.4.2024 =
` 3,50,307 (` 46,48,555 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 7,77,600 – ` 27,43,048)
Favg Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 1st April,
2024 + Balance to the credit of recognized provident fund as on 31st
March, 2025)/2 = (` 27,43,048 + ` 46,48,555)/2 = ` 36,95,802
Note – Interest on the aggregate of following will also be chargeable to tax during
A.Y. 2025-26 –
(i) ` 2,03,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2022-23]
(ii) ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2023-24]
(iii) ` 5,27,600 [Employee’s contribution exceeding ` 2,50,000 during P.Y. 2024-25]
(iv) interest accrued on ` 2,03,600 being excess employee’s contribution of P.Y. 2022-23
(v) interest accrued on ` 5,27,600 being excess employee’s contribution of
P.Y. 2023-24
Exemption in respect of payment from superannuation funds [Section 10(13)]
Any payment received by any employee from an approved superannuation fund
shall be entirely excluded from his total income if the payment is made
(a) on the death of a beneficiary;
(b) to an employee in lieu or in commutation of an annuity on his retirement at or after
a specified age or on his becoming incapacitated prior to such retirement; or
(c) by way of refund of contribution on the death of a beneficiary; or
(d) by way of contribution to an employee on his leaving the service in
connection with which the fund is established otherwise than by retirement
at or after a specified age or his becoming incapacitated prior to such
retirement, to the extent the payment made does not exceed the contribution
made prior to 1-4-1962 and the interest thereon.
(e) by way of transfer to the account of the employee under a pension scheme
referred to in section 80CCD, which is notified by the Central Government.
(B) Tax free perquisites in all cases
The following perquisites are exempt from tax in the hands of all employees.
Telephone Telephone provided by an employer to an employee
at his residence
Transport Facility Transport facility provided by an employer, being
airline or the railways for the purpose of transport of
passengers or goods to his employees of an either
free of charge or at concessional rate;
Perquisites allowed Perquisites allowed outside India by the Government
outside India by the to a citizen of India for rendering services outside
Government India;
Employer’s Employer’s contribution to staff group insurance
contribution to staff scheme;
group insurance
scheme;
Annual premium by Payment of annual premium by employer on personal
employer on personal accident policy effected by him on the life of the
accident policy employee;
Refreshment Refreshment provided to all employees during
working hours in office premises;
Subsidized lunch Subsidized lunch provided to an employee during
working hours at office or business premises provided
the value of such meal is upto ` 50; This exemption is
available only if the employee exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
Recreational facilities Recreational facilities, including club facilities,
extended to employees in general i.e., not restricted
to a few select employees;
Amount spent on Amount spent by the employer on training of
training of employees employees or amount paid for refresher management
course including expenses on boarding and lodging;
Sum payable by Sum payable by an employer to a RPF or an approved
employer to a RPF or superannuation fund or deposit-linked insurance fund
an approved established under the Coal Mines Provident Fund and
superannuation fund Miscellaneous provisions Act, 1948 or the Employees’
Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act,
1952 upto the limit prescribed;
Leave travel Leave travel concession if the assessee exercises the
concession option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A), subject to the conditions
specified under section 10 (discussed below)
Note: Value of Leave travel concession provided to the High Court judge or the
Supreme Court Judge and members of his family are completely exempt without
any conditions if they exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Medical facilities Medical facilities subject to certain prescribed limits
[Refer proviso to section 17(2)];
Rent-free official Rent-free official residence provided to a Judge of a
residence High Court or the Supreme Court if they exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A);
Conveyance facility Conveyance facility provided to High Court Judges
under section 22B of the High Court Judges
(Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 and Supreme Court
Judges under section 23A of the Supreme Court
Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 if they
exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Exemption in respect of Leave travel concession [Section 10(5)]
(i) This clause exempts the leave travel concession (LTC) received by employees
from their employers for proceeding to any place in India,
(a) either on leave or
(b) after retirement from service or
(c) after termination of his service.
Exemption under this section would be available only to employees exercising the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). It is not available under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
(ii) The benefit is available to individuals - citizens as well as non-citizens - in
respect of travel concession or assistance for himself or herself and for his/her
family- i.e., spouse and children of the individual and parents, brothers and
sisters of the individual or any of them wholly or mainly dependent on the
individual.
(iii) Limit of exemption- The exemption in all cases will be limited to the amount
actually spent subject to such conditions as specified in Rule 2B regarding the
ceiling on the number of journeys for the place of destination.
Under Rule 2B, exemption will be available in respect of 2 journeys performed
in a block of 4 calendar years commencing from the calendar year 1986.
Where such travel concession or assistance is not availed by the individual
during any block of 4 calendar years, one such unavailed LTC will be carried
forward to the immediately succeeding block of 4 calendar years and will be
eligible for exemption.
Example:
An employee does not avail any LTC for the block 2018-21. He is allowed to
carry forward maximum one unavailed LTC to be used in the succeeding block
of 2022-25. Accordingly, if he avails LTC in April 2024, the same will be treated
as having availed in respect of the block 2018-2021. Therefore, he will be
eligible for exemption in respect of that journey and two more journeys can be
further availed in respect of the block of 2022-25.
(iv) Monetary limits - Where the journey is performed on or after the 1.10.1997, the
amount exempted under section 10(5) in respect of the value of LTC shall be the
amount actually incurred on such travel subject to the following conditions:
S.No. Journey performed by Limit
1 Air Amount not exceeding the air economy
fare of the National Carrier by the
shortest route to the place of
destination.
2 Any other mode:
(i) Where rail service is Amount not exceeding the air-
available conditioned first class rail fare by the
shortest route to the place of destination
(ii) Where rail service is
not available
(a) a recognised amount not exceeding the 1st class or
public transport deluxe class fare, as the case may be, on
system exists such transport by the shortest route to
the place of destination
(b) no recognised amount equivalent to the air-
public transport conditioned first class rail fare, for the
system exists distance of the journey by the shortest
route, as if the journey had been
performed by rail
Note: The exemption referred to shall not be available to more than two
surviving children of an individual after 1.10.1998. This restrictive sub-rule
shall not apply in respect of children born before 1.10.1998 and also in case
of multiple births after one child.
Exemption in respect of leave travel concession under section 10(5) would
be available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
ILLUSTRATION 11
Mr. D went on a holiday on 25.12.2024 to Delhi with his wife and three children (one son
– age 5 years; twin daughters – age 3 years). They went by flight (economy class) and
the total cost of tickets reimbursed by his employer was ` 60,000 (` 45,000 for adults and
` 15,000 for the three minor children). Compute the amount of LTC exempt if Mr. D
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Since the son’s age is more than the twin daughters, Mr. D can avail exemption for
all his three children. The restriction of two children is not applicable to multiple
births after one child. The holiday being in India and the journey being performed
by air (economy class), the entire reimbursement met by the employer is fully
exempt in the hands of Mr. D, since he is exercising the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
ILLUSTRATION 12
In the above illustration 11, will there be any difference if among his three children the
twins were 5 years old and the son 3 years old? Discuss.
SOLUTION
Since the twins’ age is more than the son, Mr. D cannot avail for exemption for all his
three children. LTC exemption can be availed in respect of only two children. Taxable
LTC = 15,000 × = ` 5,000.
LTC exempt would be only ` 55,000 (i.e. ` 60,000 – ` 5,000)
Medical facilities [Proviso to section 17(2)]
The following medical facilities are exempt from tax:
(i) Value of medical treatment in any hospital maintained by the employer:
The value of any medical treatment provided to an employee or any member
of his family in any hospital maintained by the employer;
(ii) Reimbursement of expenditure actually incurred on medical treatment:
Any sum paid by the employer in respect of any expenditure actually incurred
by the employee on his medical treatment or treatment of any member of his
family
• in any hospital maintained by the Government/local authority/any
other hospital approved by the Government for the purpose of medical
treatment of its employees;
• in respect of the prescribed disease or ailments in any hospital
approved by the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief Commissioner
having regard to the prescribed guidelines.
• in respect of any illness relating to COVID-19 subject to conditions
notified by the Central Government
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 90/2022
dated 5.8.2022, specified that for claiming benefit of such exemption, the
employee has to submit the following documents to the employer, –
(a) the COVID-19 positive report of the employee or family member,
or medical report if clinically determined to be COVID-19 positive
through investigations, in a hospital or an in-patient facility by a
treating physician of a person so admitted;
(b) all necessary documents of medical diagnosis or treatment of the
employee or his family member for COVID-19 or illness related to
COVID-19 suffered within 6 months from the date of being
determined as COVID-19 positive; and
(c) a certification in respect of all expenditure incurred on the
treatment of COVID-19 or illness related to COVID-19 of the
employee or of any member of his family.
(iii) Premium paid to effect an insurance on the health of employee: Any
premium paid by an employer in relation to an employee to effect an
insurance on the health of such employee. However, any such scheme should
be approved by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory
Development Authority (IRDA) for the purposes of section 36(1)(ib).
(iv) Reimbursement of premium paid to effect an insurance on the health of
employee or for the family of an employee: Any sum paid by the employer
in respect of any premium paid by the employee to effect an insurance on his
health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme approved
by the Central Government or the Insurance Regulatory Development
Authority (IRDA)for the purposes of section 80D.
(v) Amount paid towards expenditure incurred outside India on medical
treatment: Any expenditure incurred by the employer or any sum paid by the
employer on any expenditure actually incurred by the employee on the
following:
(a) medical treatment of the employee or any member of the family of
such employee outside India;
(b) travel and stay abroad of the employee or any member of the family
of such employee for medical treatment;
(c) travel and stay abroad of one attendant who accompanies the
patient in connection with such treatment.
Conditions:
1. The perquisite element in respect of expenditure on medical treatment
and stay abroad will be exempt only to the extent permitted by the RBI.
2. The expenses in respect of traveling of the patient and the attendant
will be exempt if the employee’s gross total income as computed before
including the said expenditure does not exceed ` 2 lakh.
Note: For this purpose, family means spouse and children of the individual.
Children may be dependent or independent, married or unmarried. It also includes
parents, brothers and sisters of the individual if they are wholly or mainly
dependent upon him. Hospital includes a dispensary or a clinic or a nursing home.
ILLUSTRATION 13
Compute the taxable value of the perquisite in respect of medical facilities received by
Mr. G from his employer during the P.Y. 2024-25:
Medical premium paid for insuring health of Mr. G ` 7,000
Treatment of Mr. G by his family doctor ` 5,000
Treatment of Mrs. G in a Government hospital ` 25,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s grandfather in a private clinic ` 12,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s mother (68 years and dependant) by family doctor ` 8,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s sister (dependant) in a nursing home ` 3,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s brother (independent) ` 6,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s father (75 years and dependent) abroad ` 50,000
Expenses of staying abroad of the patient ` 30,000
Limit specified by RBI ` 75,000
SOLUTION
Computation of taxable value of perquisite in the hands of Mr. G
Particulars
` `
Treatment of Mrs. G in a Government hospital -
Treatment of Mr. G’s father (75 years and dependent) abroad 50,000
Expenses of staying abroad of the patient and attendant 30,000
80,000
Less: Exempt up to limit specified by RBI 75,000 5,000
Medical premium paid for insuring health of Mr. G -
Treatment of Mr. G by his family doctor 5,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s mother (dependent) by family doctor 8,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s sister (dependent) in a nursing home 3,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s grandfather in a private clinic 12,000
Treatment of Mr. G’s brother (independent) 6,000
Taxable value of perquisite 39,000
Payment of premium on personal accident insurance policies
If an employer takes personal accident insurance policies on the life of employees
and pays the insurance premium, no immediate benefit would become payable and
benefit will accrue at a future date only if certain events take place.
Moreover, the employers would be taking such policy in their business interest only,
so as to indemnify themselves from payment of any compensation. Therefore, the
premium so paid will not constitute a taxable perquisite in the employees’ hands‡.
(C) Perquisites taxable only in the hands of specified employees
[Section 17(2)(iii)]
Any monetary obligation of the employee which is discharged by the employer is
perquisite in the hands of all employees as per section 17(2)(iv). However,
‡CIT vs. Lala Shri Dhar [1972] 84 ITR 19 (Del.)
sometimes instead of discharging employee’s obligation, employer provides
perquisites in the form of facility to the employee. Such perquisites are taxable in
the hands of specified employees only.
The value of any benefit or amenity granted or provided free of cost or at
concessional rate which have not been included in (A) & (B) above will be taxable
in the hands of specified employees. Followings are the example of such services:
(i) Provision of sweeper, gardener, watchman or personal attendant
(ii) Facility of use of gas, electricity or water supplied by employer
(iii) Free or concessional tickets
(iv) Use of motor car
(v) Free or concessional educational facilities
For valuation of such perquisites, refer discussion on valuation of perquisite.
Meaning of specified employees:
(i) Director employee: An employee of a company who is also a director is a
specified employee. It is immaterial whether he is a full-time director or part-
time director. It also does not matter whether he is a nominee of the
management, workers, financial institutions or the Government. It is also not
material whether or not he is a director throughout the previous year.
(ii) An employee who has substantial interest in the company: An employee
of a company who has substantial interest in that company is a specified
employee. A person has a substantial interest in a company if he is a beneficial
owner of equity shares carrying 20% or more of the voting power in the company.
Beneficial and legal ownership: In order to determine whether a person has
a substantial interest in a company, it is the beneficial ownership of equity
shares carrying 20% or more of the voting power that is relevant rather than
the legal ownership.
Example:
A, Karta of a HUF, is a registered shareholder of Bright Ltd. The amount for
purchasing the shares is financed by the HUF. The dividend is also received by
the HUF. Supposing further that A is an employee in Bright Ltd., the question
arises whether he is a specified employee.
In this case, he cannot be called a specified person since he has no beneficial
interest in the shares registered in his name. It is only for the purpose of
satisfying the statutory requirements that the shares are registered in the name
of A. All the benefits arising from the shareholding goes to the HUF. Conversely,
it may be noted that an employee who is not a registered shareholder will be
considered as a specified employee if he has beneficial interest in 20% or more
of the equity shares in the company.
(iii) Employee drawing in excess of ` 50,000: An employee other than an
employee described in (i) & (ii) above, whose income chargeable under the
head ‘salaries’ exceeds ` 50,000 is a specified employee. The above salary is
to be considered exclusive of the value of all benefits or amenities not
provided by way of monetary payments.
In other words, for computing the limit of ` 50,000, the following items
have to be excluded or deducted:
(a) all non-monetary benefits;
(b) monetary benefits which are exempt under section 10. This is because
the exemptions provided under section 10 are excluded completely from
salaries.
(c) Standard deduction upto ` 50,000 if the assessee exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A) and ` 75,000 if the assessee is paying tax under default
tax regime [under section 16(ia)].
(d) Deduction for entertainment allowance [under section 16(ii)] and
deduction toward professional tax [under section 16(iii)] are also to be
excluded if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
If an employee is employed with more than one employer, the aggregate of
the salary received from all employers is to be taken into account in
determining the above ceiling limit of ` 50,000, i.e., Salary for this purpose =
Basic Salary + Dearness Allowance + Commission, whether payable monthly
or turnover based +Bonus + Fees + Any other taxable payment + Any taxable
allowances + Any other monetary benefits – Deductions under section 16]
(2) Valuation of Perquisites
The Income-tax Rules, 1962 contain the provisions for valuation of perquisites. It is
important to note that only those perquisites which the employee actually enjoys have
to be valued and taxed in his hand.
Example:
Suppose a company offers housing accommodation rent-free to an employee but
the latter declines to accept it, then the value of such accommodation obviously
cannot be evaluated and taxed in the hands of the employees.
For the purpose of computing the income chargeable under the head “Salaries”,
the value of perquisites provided by the employer directly or indirectly to the
employee or to any member of his household by reason of his employment shall
be determined in accordance with Rule 3.
(A) Value of rent free accommodation/ Value of accommodation provided
to employee at a concessional rate [Sub-rule (1) of Rule 3]
Accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate, if
the value of accommodation computed in the prescribed manner exceeds the rent
recoverable from, or payable by, the assessee [Explanation to section 17(2)(ii)].
The value of residential accommodation provided by the employer during the
previous year shall be determined in the following manner –
Sl. Circumstances In case of In case of furnished
No. unfurnished accommodation
accommodation
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Where the • License fee • The value of perquisite as
accommodation is determined by the determined under
provided by the Central column (3) should be
Central Government or any increased by
Government or State Government
(i) If furniture is owned by
any State in respect of
employer,
Government to the accommodation in
10% per annum of the
employees either accordance with the
cost of furniture
holding office or rules framed by
(including television sets,
post in connection such Government
radio sets, refrigerators,
with the affairs of
other household
the Union or of as reduced appliances, air-
such State by conditioning plant or
• the rent actually equipment).
paid by the (ii) If such furniture is hired
employee. from a third party,
• The actual hire charges
payable for the same
as reduced by
• any charges paid or
payable for the same by
the employee during the
previous year
2. Where the (i) 10% of salary in • The value of perquisite as
accommodation is cities having determined under
provided by any population > 40 column (3) should be
other employer lakhs as per 2011 increased by
(a) where the census; (i) If furniture is owned by
accommodation (ii) 7.5% of salary in employer,
is owned by the cities having 10% per annum of the
employer population > 15 cost of furniture
lakhs ≤ 40 lakhs (including television sets,
as per 2011 refrigerators, other
census; household appliances,
(iii) 5% of salary in air-conditioning plant or
other areas, equipment or other
in respect of the similar appliances or
period during which gadgets).
the said (ii) If such furniture is
accommodation was hired from a third
occupied by the party,
employee during the • the actual hire charges
previous year payable for the same
as reduced by as reduced by
the rent, if any, • any charges paid or
actually paid by the payable for the same by
employee. the employee during the
previous year
(b) where the • Actual amount of • The value of perquisite as
accommodation lease rental paid or determined under
is taken on lease payable by the column (3) should be
or rent by the employer or increased by
employer • 10% of salary (i) If furniture is owned by
whichever is lower, employer,
as reduced by 10% per annum of the
• the rent, if any, cost of furniture
actually paid by the (including television sets,
employee. radio sets, refrigerators,
other household
appliances, air-
conditioning plant or
equipment or other
similar appliances or
gadgets).
(ii) If such furniture is
hired from a third
party,
• the actual hire charges
payable for the same
as reduced by
• any charges paid or
payable for the same by
the employee during the
previous year
3. Where the Not applicable • 24% of salary paid or
accommodation is payable for the previous
provided by any year or
employer, whether • the actual charges paid
Government or or payable to such hotel,
any other whichever is lower, for the
employer, in a period during which such
hotel. accommodation is provided
as reduced by
• the rent, if any, actually
paid or payable by the
employee.
However, where the
employee is provided such
accommodation for a period
not exceeding in aggregate
15 days on his transfer from
one place to another, there
would be no perquisite.
Notes:
(1) Accommodation provided on account of transfer from one place to
another: If an employee is provided with accommodation, on account of his
transfer from one place to another, at the new place of posting while retaining
the accommodation at the other place, the value of perquisite shall be
determined with reference to only one such accommodation which has the
lower perquisite value, as calculated above, for a period not exceeding 90
days and thereafter, the value of perquisite shall be charged for both such
accommodations.
(2) Value of perquisite to be restricted to CII: Where the accommodation is
owned or taken on lease or rent by the employer and the same
accommodation is continued to be provided to the same employee for more
than one previous year, the value of perquisite as calculated in Sl. No. 2. above
shall not exceed the amount so calculated for the first previous year, as
multiplied by the amount which is a ratio of the CII for the previous year for
which the value is calculated and the CII for the previous year in which the
accommodation was initially provided to the employee.
(3) Employee serving on deputation: Where the accommodation is provided
by the Central Government or any State Government to an employee who is
serving on deputation with any body or undertaking under the control of such
Government,-
(i) the employer of such an employee shall be deemed to be that body or
undertaking where the employee is serving on deputation; and
(ii) the value of perquisite of such an accommodation shall be the amount
calculated in accordance with Sl. No.2.(a) of the above table, as if the
accommodation is owned by the employer.
(4) “Accommodation” includes a house, flat, farm house or part thereof, or
accommodation in a hotel, motel, service apartment, guest house, caravan,
mobile home, ship or other floating structure.
(5) “Hotel” includes licensed accommodation in the nature of motel, service
apartment or guest house.
(6) “First previous year” means the P.Y. 2023-24 or the previous year in which the
accommodation was provided to the employee, whichever is later.
Meaning of Salary for Valuation Rules
“Salary” includes pay, allowances, bonus or commission payable monthly or otherwise
or any monetary payment, by whatever name called, from one or more employers, as
the case may be. However, it does not include the following, namely–
(1) dearness allowance or dearness pay unless it enters into the computation of
superannuation or retirement benefits of the employee concerned;
(2) employer’s contribution to the provident fund account of the employee;
(3) allowances which are exempted from the payment of tax;
(4) value of the perquisites specified in section 17(2);
(5) any payment or expenditure specifically excluded under proviso to section
17(2);
(6) lump-sum payments received at the time of termination of service or
superannuation or voluntary retirement, like gratuity, severance pay, leave
encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits, commutation of pension and
similar payments;
ILLUSTRATION 14
Mr. C is a Finance Manager in ABC Ltd. The company has provided him with rent-
free unfurnished accommodation in Mumbai. He gives you the following particulars:
Basic salary ` 8,500 p.m.
Dearness Allowance ` 2,000 p.m. (30% is for retirement benefits)
Bonus ` 1,500 p.m.
Even though the company allotted the house to him on 1.4.2024, he occupied the
same only from 1.11.2024. Calculate the taxable value of the perquisite for
A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
Value of the rent free unfurnished accommodation
= 10% of salary for the relevant period
= 10% of [(` 8,500 × 5) + (` 2,000 × 30% × 5) + (` 1,500 × 5)] [See Note below]
= 10% of ` 53,000 = ` 5,300.
Note: Since, Mr. C occupies the house only from 1.11.2024, we have to include the
salary due to him only in respect of months during which he has occupied the
accommodation. Hence salary for 5 months (i.e. from 1.11.2024 to 31.03.2025) will
be considered.
ILLUSTRATION 15
Using the data given in the previous illustration 14, compute the value of the
perquisite if Mr. C is required to pay a rent of ` 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the
use of this accommodation.
SOLUTION
First of all, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a
concessional rate. If the value of accommodation computed in prescribed manner
exceeds the rent recoverable, or payable by, the assessee, the accommodation
would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.
In this case, 10% of salary would be ` 5,300 (i.e. 10% of ` 53,000). The rent paid by
the employee is ` 5,000 (i.e., ` 1,000 x 5). Since 15% of salary exceeds the rent
recovered from the employee, the accommodation would be deemed to have been
provided at a concessional rate.
Value of the accommodation = ` 5,300
Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000
Perquisite value of accommodation given at a concessional rent = ` 300
ILLUSTRATION 16
Using the data given in illustration 14, compute the value of the perquisite if ABC
Ltd. has taken this accommodation on a lease rent of ` 1,025 p.m. and Mr. C is
required to pay a rent of ` 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the use of this
accommodation.
SOLUTION
Here again, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a
concessional rate.
In the case of accommodation taken on lease by the employer, the accommodation
would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate if the rent paid by
the employer or 10% of salary, whichever is lower, exceeds rent recoverable from
the employee.
In this case, 10% of salary is ` 5,300 (i.e. 10% of ` 53,000). Rent paid by the employer
is ` 5,125 (i.e. ` 1,025 x 5). The lower of the two is ` 5,125, which exceeds the rent
paid by the employee i.e., ` 5,000 (` 1,000 x 5). Therefore, the accommodation
would be deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.
Value of the accommodation [Note] = ` 5,125
Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000
Value of accommodation given at a concessional rent = ` 125
Note: Value of the accommodation is lower of
(i) Lease rent paid by the company for relevant period = ` 1,025 × 5 = ` 5,125
(ii) 10% of salary for the relevant period (computed earlier) = ` 5,300
ILLUSTRATION 17
Using the data given in illustration 14, compute the value of the perquisite if ABC
Ltd. has provided a television (WDV ` 10,000; Cost ` 25,000) and two air conditioners.
The rent paid by the company for the air conditioners is ` 400 p.m. each. The
television was provided on 1.1.2025. However, Mr. C is required to pay a rent of
` 1,000 p.m. to the company, for the use of this furnished accommodation.
SOLUTION
Here again, we have to see whether the accommodation is provided at a
concessional rate. In the case of accommodation owned by the employer in a city
having a population exceeding 40 lakhs, the accommodation would be deemed to
have been provided at a concessional rate, if 10% of salary exceeds rent recoverable
from the employee. In case of furnished accommodation, the excess of hire charges
paid or 10% p.a. of the cost of furniture, as the case may be, over and above the
charges paid or payable by the employee has to be added to the value arrived at
above to determine whether the accommodation is provided at a concessional rate.
In this case, 10% of salary is ` 5,300 (i.e. 10% of ` 53,000). The value of furniture of
` 4,625 (See Note below) is to be added to 10% of salary. The rent paid by the
employee is ` 5,000 (i.e. ` 1,000 x 5). Therefore, the accommodation would be
deemed to have been provided at a concessional rate.
Value of the accommodation (computed earlier) = ` 5,300
Add: Value of furniture provided by the employer [Note] = ` 4,625
Value of furnished accommodation = ` 9,925
Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000
Value of furnished accommodation given at a concessional rent = ` 4,925
Note: Value of the furniture provided = (` 400 p.m. × 2 × 5 months) + (` 25,000 ×
10% p.a. for 3 months) = ` 4,000 + ` 625 = ` 4,625
ILLUSTRATION 18
Using the data given in illustration 17 above, compute the value of the perquisite if
Mr. C is a government employee. The licence fees determined by the Government for this
accommodation was ` 700 p.m.
SOLUTION
In the case of Government employees, the accommodation would be deemed to
have been provided at a concessional rate, if the licence fees determined by the
employer as increased by the value of furniture and fixture exceeds the rent recovered/
recoverable from the employee.
In this case, ` 3,500 (licence fees: ` 700 x 5) + ` 4,625 (Value of furniture) is the value
of furnished accommodation. The rent paid by the employee is ` 5,000 (i.e. ` 1,000
x 5). Therefore, the accommodation would be deemed to have been provided at a
concessional rate.
Value of the accommodation (` 700 × 5) = ` 3,500
Add: Value of furniture provided by the employer (computed earlier) = ` 4,625
Value of furnished accommodation = ` 8,125
Less: Rent paid by the employee (` 1,000 × 5) = ` 5,000
Perquisite value of furnished accommodation given at concessional rent = ` 3,125
(B) Motor Car [Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3]
If motor car is provided by the employer to the employee, it will be perquisite in
the hands of specified employees only. However, the use of any vehicle provided
by a company or an employer for journey by the assessee from his residence to his
office or other place of work, or from such office or place to his residence shall not
be regarded as a benefit given or provided to him free of cost or at concessional
rate. [Explanation below section 17(2)(iii)]
But if the motor car is owned by the employee and used by him or members of his
family wholly for personal purposes and for which employer reimburses the running
and maintenance expenses of the car, it will be perquisite in the hands of all employees.
The value of perquisite by way of use of motor car to an employee by an employer
shall be determined in the following manner –
VALUE OF PERQUISITE PER CALENDAR MONTH
Sl. Circumstances Where cubic capacity Where cubic capacity of
No. of engine does not engine exceeds 1.6 litres
exceed 1.6 litres
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(1) Where the motor
car is owned or
hired by the
employer and –
(a) is used wholly Not a perquisite, Not a perquisite, provided
and exclusively in provided the the documents specified
the performance documents specified in Note (2) below the table
of his official in Note (2) below the are maintained by the
duties table are maintained employer.
by the employer.
(b) is used Actual amount of Actual amount of
exclusively for expenditure incurred expenditure incurred by
the private or by the employer on the the employer on the
personal running and running and maintenance
purposes of the maintenance of motor of motor car during the
employee or any car during the relevant relevant previous year
member of his previous year including including remuneration, if
household and remuneration, if any, any, paid by the employer
the running and paid by the employer to the chauffeur as
maintenance to the chauffeur as increased by the amount
expenses are met increased by the representing normal wear
or reimbursed by amount representing and tear of the motor car
the employer; normal wear and tear and as reduced by any
of the motor car and as amount charged from the
reduced by any employee for such use.
amount charged from
the employee for such
use.
(c) is used partly in
the performance
of duties and
partly for private
or personal
purposes of his
own or any
member of his
household and-
` 1,800 (plus ` 900, if ` 2,400 (plus ` 900, if
(i) the expenses on
chauffeur is also chauffeur is also provided
maintenance and
provided to run the to run the motor car)
running are met
motor car)
or reimbursed by
the employer ` 900 (plus ` 900, if
` 600 (plus ` 900, if chauffeur is also provided
(ii) the expenses on
chauffeur is also by the employer to run the
running and
provided by the motor car)
maintenance for
employer to run the
private or personal
motor car)
use are fully met
by the assessee.
(2) Where the employee
owns a motor car but
the actual running
and maintenance
charges (including
remuneration of the
chauffeur, if any) are
met or reimbursed
to him by the
employer and –
(a) such Not a perquisite, Not a perquisite, provided
reimbursement is provided the the documents specified
for the use of the documents specified in Note (2) below the table
vehicle wholly in Note (2) below the are maintained by the
and exclusively table are maintained employer.
for official by the employer.
purposes
(b) such The actual amount of The actual amount of
reimbursement is expenditure incurred expenditure incurred by
for the use of the by the employer as the employer as reduced
vehicle partly for reduced by the by the amount specified in
official purposes amount specified in Sl. No. (1)(c)(i) above (Also
and partly for Sl. No. (1)(c)(i) above see note (2) below this
personal or (Also see note (2) table).
private purposes below this table).
of the employee
or any member of
his household.
(3) Where the employee
owns any other
automotive
conveyance but the
actual running and
maintenance
charges are met or
reimbursed to him
by the employer and
(a) such Not a perquisite, Not applicable.
reimbursement is provided the
for the use of the documents specified in
vehicle wholly and the note (2) below the
exclusively for table are maintained
official purposes by the employer.
(b) such The actual amount of
reimbursement is expenditure incurred
for the use of by the employer as
vehicle partly for reduced by the amount
official purposes
and partly for of ` 900. (Also see note
personal or private (2) below the table)
purposes of the
employee
Notes:
(1) Where more than one motor car is provided - Where one or more motor-
cars are owned or hired by the employer and the employee or any member
of his household are allowed the use of such motor-car or all of any of such
motor-cars (otherwise than wholly and exclusively in the performance of his
duties), the value of perquisite shall be the amount calculated in respect of
one car as if the employee had been provided one motor-car for use partly
in the performance of his duties and partly for his private or personal
purposes and the amount calculated in respect of the other car or cars as if
he had been provided with such car or cars exclusively for his private or
personal purposes.
(2) Documents to be maintained in certain cases - Where the employer or the
employee claims that the motor-car is used wholly and exclusively in the
performance of official duty or that the actual expenses on the running and
maintenance of the motor-car owned by the employee for official purposes
is more than the amounts deductible in Sl. No. 2(b) or 3(b) of the above table,
he may claim a higher amount attributable to such official use and the value
of perquisite in such a case shall be the actual amount of charges met or
reimbursed by the employer as reduced by such higher amount attributable
to official use of the vehicle provided that the following conditions are
fulfilled :-
(a) the employer has maintained complete details of journey undertaken
for official purpose which may include date of journey, destination,
mileage, and the amount of expenditure incurred thereon;
(b) the employer gives a certificate to the effect that the expenditure was
incurred wholly and exclusively for the performance of official duties.
(3) Meaning of Normal wear and tear of a motor-car - For computing the
perquisite value of motor car, the normal wear and tear of a motor car shall
be taken at 10% per annum of the actual cost of the motor-car or cars.
(C) Valuation of benefit of provision of domestic servants
[Sub-rule (3) of Rule 3]
If servants are engaged by the employee and employer paid or reimbursed the
employee for the wages of such servants, it will be perquisite in the hands of all
employees. But if the domestic servants are engaged by the employer and facility
of such servants is provided to the employee, it will be perquisite in the hands of
specified employees only.
(i) The value of benefit to the employee or any member of his household
resulting from the provision by the employer of the services of a sweeper, a
gardener, a watchman or a personal attendant, shall be the actual cost to the
employer.
(ii) The actual cost in such a case shall be the total amount of salary paid or
payable by the employer or any other person on his behalf for such services
as reduced by any amount paid by the employee for such services.
ILLUSTRATION 19
Mr. X and Mr. Y are working for M/s. Gama Ltd. As per salary fixation norms, the following
perquisites were offered:
(i) For Mr. X, who engaged a domestic servant for ` 500 per month, his employer
reimbursed the entire salary paid to the domestic servant i.e. ` 500 per month.
(ii) For Mr. Y, he was provided with a domestic servant @ ` 500 per month as part
of remuneration package.
You are required to comment on the taxability of the above in the hands of Mr. X and
Mr. Y, who are not specified employees.
SOLUTION
In the case of Mr. X, it becomes an obligation which the employee would have
discharged even if the employer did not reimburse the same. Hence, the perquisite will
be covered under section 17(2)(iv) and will be taxable in the hands of Mr. X. This is
taxable in the case of all employees.
In the case of Mr. Y, it cannot be considered as an obligation which the employee
would meet. The employee might choose not to have a domestic servant. This is
taxable only in the case of specified employees covered by section 17(2)(iii). Hence,
there is no perquisite element in the hands of Mr. Y.
(D) Valuation of gas, electricity or water supplied by employer
[Sub-rule (4) of Rule 3]
If gas, electricity or water connections are taken by the employee and employer
paid or reimbursed the employee for such expenses, it will be perquisite in the
hands of all employees. But if the gas, electricity or water connections are taken in
the name of employer and facility of such supplies are provided to the employee,
it will be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only. The value of benefit
to the employee resulting from the provision of gas, electricity or water supplied
by the employer shall be determined as follow:
Circumstances Value of benefit
If payment is made to agency sum equal to the amount paid on that
supplying of gas, electricity etc. account by the employer to the agency
supplying the gas, electric energy or water
If supply is made from resources manufacturing cost per unit incurred by the
owned by the employer employer
Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such services, the amount
so paid shall be deducted from the value so arrived at.
(E) Valuation of free or concessional educational facilities [Sub-rule (5)
of Rule 3]
If school fees of children of employee or any member of employee’s house hold is paid
or reimbursed by the employer on employee’s behalf, it will be perquisite in the hands
of all employees. But if the education facility is provided in the school maintained by
the employer or in any school by reason of his being employment at free of cost or at
concessional rate, it would be perquisite in the hands of specified employees only. The
value of benefit to the employee resulting from the provision of free or concessional
educational facility for any member of his household shall be determined as follow:
Circumstances Value of benefit
If the educational institution is cost of such education in a similar
maintained and owned by the employer institution in or near the locality.
If free educational facilities are allowed in However, there would be no perquisite
any other educational institution by if the cost of such education or the
reason of his being in employment of value of such benefit per child does
that employer not exceed ` 1,000 p.m.
Others amount of expenditure incurred by the
employer in that behalf
Where any amount is paid or recovered from the employee on that account, the
value of benefit shall be reduced by the amount so paid or recovered.
Note: The exemption of ` 1,000 p.m. is allowed only in case of education facility
provided to the children of the employee and not in case of education facility
provided to other household members.
(F) Free or concessional tickets [Sub-rule (6) of Rule 3]
The value of any benefit or amenity resulting from the provision by an employer
• who is engaged in the carriage of passengers or goods,
• to any employee or to any member of his household for personal or private
journey free of cost or at concessional fare,
• in any conveyance owned, leased or made available by any other
arrangement by such employer for the purpose of transport of passengers or
goods
shall be taken to be the value at which such benefit or amenity is offered by such
employer to the public as reduced by the amount, if any, paid by or recovered from
the employee for such benefit or amenity.
However, there would be no such perquisite to the employees of an airline or the
railways.
(G) Valuation of other fringe benefits and amenities [Sub-rule (7) of Rule 3]
Section 17(2)(viii) provides that the value of any other fringe benefit or amenity as may
be prescribed would be included in the definition of perquisite and taxable in the
hands of all employees. Accordingly, the following other fringe benefits or amenities
are prescribed and the value thereof shall be determined in the manner provided
hereunder:-
(i) Interest-free or concessional loan [Sub-rule 7(i) of Rule 3]
(a) The value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from the provision of
interest-free or concessional loan for any purpose made available to
• the employee or
• any member of his household
during the relevant previous year by the employer or any person on his
behalf shall be determined as the sum equal to the interest computed
at the rate charged per annum by the State Bank of India, as on the 1st
day of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the same
purpose advanced by it on the maximum outstanding monthly balance
as reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any such
member of his household.
“Maximum outstanding monthly balance” means the aggregate
outstanding balance for each loan as on the last day of each month.
(b) However, no value would be charged if such loans are made available
for medical treatment in respect of prescribed diseases (like cancer,
tuberculosis, etc.) or where the amount of loans are not exceeding in
the aggregate ` 20,000.
(c) Further, where the benefit relates to the loans made available for
medical treatment referred to above, the exemption so provided shall
not apply to so much of the loan as has been reimbursed to the
employee under any medical insurance scheme.
(ii) Travelling, touring and accommodation [Sub-rule 7(ii) of Rule 3]
(a) If Travelling, touring, accommodation etc. expenses are paid or
reimbursed by employer - The value of travelling, touring,
accommodation and any other expenses paid for or borne or
reimbursed by the employer for any holiday availed of by the employee
or any member of his household, other than leave travel concession or
assistance, shall be determined as the sum equal to the amount of the
expenditure incurred by such employer in that behalf.
(b) If Travelling, touring, accommodation etc. facilities are maintained
by employer to particular employees only - Where such facility is
maintained by the employer, and is not available uniformly to all
employees, the value of benefit shall be taken to be the value at which
such facilities are offered by other agencies to the public.
(c) Expenses on any member of household accompanying such
employee on office tour - Where the employee is on official tour and
the expenses are incurred in respect of any member of his household
accompanying him, the amount of expenditure so incurred shall also be
a fringe benefit or amenity.
(d) If official tour is extended as vacation - However, where any official tour
is extended as a vacation, the value of such fringe benefit shall be limited to
the expenses incurred in relation to such extended period of stay or
vacation. The amount so determined shall be reduced by the amount, if any,
paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit or amenity.
(iii) Free or concessional food and non-alcoholic beverages
[Sub-rule 7(iii) of Rule 3]
(a) The value of free food and non-alcoholic beverages provided by the
employer to an employee shall be the amount of expenditure incurred
by such employer. The amount so determined shall be reduced by the
amount, if any, paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit
or amenity.
(b) However, the following would not be treated as a perquisite -
(1) free food and non-alcoholic beverages provided by such employer
• during working hours at office or business premises or
• through paid vouchers which are not transferable and
usable only at eating joints,
to the extent the value thereof either case does not exceed fifty
rupees per meal or
(2) tea or snacks provided during working hours or
(3) free food and non-alcoholic beverages during working hours
provided in a remote area or an off-shore installation.
Exemption in respect of free food and non-alcoholic beverage
provided by such employer through paid voucher would not
be available in case an employee pays tax under the default
tax regime under section 115BAC.
(iv) Value of gift, voucher or token in lieu of such gift
[Sub-rule 7(iv) of Rule 3]
(a) The value of any gift, or voucher, or token in lieu of which such gift may
be received by the employee or by member of his household on
ceremonial occasions or otherwise from the employer shall be
determined as the sum equal to the amount of such gift:
(b) However, if the value of such gift, voucher or token, as the case may be,
is below ` 5,000 in the aggregate during the previous year, the value of
perquisite shall be taken as ‘Nil’.
(v) Credit card expenses [Sub-rule 7(v) of Rule 3]
(a) The amount of expenses including membership fees and annual fees
incurred by the employee or any member of his household, which is
charged to a credit card (including any add-on-card) provided by the
employer, or otherwise, paid for or reimbursed by such employer shall
be taken to be the value of perquisite chargeable to tax as reduced by
the amount, if any paid or recovered from the employee for such benefit
or amenity.
(b) However, such expenses incurred wholly and exclusively for official
purposes would not be treated as a perquisite if the following
conditions are fulfilled.
(1) complete details in respect of such expenditure are maintained by
the employer which may, inter alia, include the date of
expenditure and the nature of expenditure;
(2) the employer gives a certificate for such expenditure to the effect
that the same was incurred wholly and exclusively for the
performance of official duties.
(vi) Club expenditure [Sub-rule 7(vi) of Rule 3]
(a) The value of benefit to the employee resulting from the payment or
reimbursement by the employer of any expenditure incurred (including the
amount of annual or periodical fee) in a club by him or by a member of his
household shall be determined to be the actual amount of expenditure
incurred or reimbursed by such employer on that account. The amount so
determined shall be reduced by the amount, if any, paid or recovered from
the employee for such benefit or amenity.
However, where the employer has obtained corporate membership of
the club and the facility is enjoyed by the employee or any member of
his household, the value of perquisite shall not include the initial fee
paid for acquiring such corporate membership.
(b) Further, if such expenditure is incurred wholly and exclusively for
business purposes, it would not be treated as a perquisite provided the
following conditions are fulfilled:-
(1) complete details in respect of such expenditure are maintained by
the employer which may, inter alia, include the date of expenditure,
the nature of expenditure and its business expediency;
(2) the employer gives a certificate for such expenditure to the effect
that the same was incurred wholly and exclusively for the
performance of official duties.
(c) There would be no perquisite for use of health club, sports and similar
facilities provided uniformly to all employees by the employer.
(vii) Use of moveable assets [Sub-rule 7(vii) of Rule 3]
Value of perquisite is determined as under:
Asset given Value of benefit
(a) Use of laptops and computers Nil
(b) Movable assets, other than - 10% p.a. of the actual cost of such
asset, or the amount of rent or
(i) laptops and computers;
charge paid, or payable by the
and
employer, as the case may be
(ii) assets already specified
Note: Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such asset, the
amount so paid shall be deducted from the value of perquisite determined
above.
(viii) Transfer of moveable assets [Sub-rule 7(viii) of Rule 3]
Value of perquisite is determined as under:
Assets Value of perquisite
transferred
Computers and Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed
electronic items @50% on WDV for each completed year of usage]
Motor cars Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed
@20% on WDV for each completed year of usage]
Any other asset Depreciated value of asset [depreciation is computed
@10% on SLM for each completed year of usage]
Note: Where the employee is paying any amount in respect of such asset, the
amount so paid shall be deducted from the value of perquisite determined
above.
(ix) Other benefit or amenity [Sub-rule 7(ix) of Rule 3]
The value of any other benefit or amenity, service, right or privilege provided
by the employer shall be determined on the basis of cost to the employer
under an arms' length transaction as reduced by the employee's contribution,
if any.
However, there will be no taxable perquisite in respect of expenses on
telephones including mobile phone actually incurred on behalf of the
employee by the employer i.e., if an employer pays or reimburses telephone
bills or mobile phone charges of employee, there will be no taxable
perquisite.
ILLUSTRATION 20
Mr. X retired from the services of M/s Y Ltd. on 31.01.2025, after completing service of 30
years and one month. He had joined the company on 1.1.1995 at the age of 30 years
and received the following on his retirement:
(i) Gratuity ` 6,00,000. He was covered under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
(ii) Leave encashment of ` 3,30,000 for 330 days leave balance in his account. He
was credited 30 days leave for each completed year of service.
(iii) As per the scheme of the company, he was offered a car which was purchased
on 30.01.2022 by the company for ` 5,00,000. Company has recovered
` 2,00,000 from him for the car. Company depreciates the vehicles at the rate
of 15% on Straight Line Method.
(iv) An amount of ` 3,00,000 as commutation of pension for 2/3 of his pension
commutation.
(v) Company presented him a gift voucher worth ` 6,000 on his retirement.
(vi) His colleagues also gifted him a Television (LCD) worth ` 50,000 from their own
contribution.
Following are the other particulars:
(i) He has drawn a basic salary of ` 20,000 and 50% dearness allowance per month
for the period from 01.04.2024 to 31.01.2025.
(ii) Received pension of ` 5,000 per month for the period 01.02.2025 to 31.03.2025
after commutation of pension.
Compute his gross total income from the above for Assessment Year 2025-26
assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. X for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Basic Salary = ` 20,000 x 10 2,00,000
Dearness Allowance = 50% of basic salary 1,00,000
Gift Voucher (See Note - 1) 6,000
Transfer of car (See Note - 2) 56,000
Gratuity (See Note - 3) 80,769
Leave encashment (See Note - 4) 1,30,000
Uncommuted pension (` 5000 x 2) 10,000
Commuted pension (See Note - 5) 1,50,000
Gross Salary 7,32,769
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) 50,000
Taxable Salary /Gross Total Income 6,82,769
Notes:
(1) As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift
received by the employee or by member of his household not exceeding
` 5,000 in aggregate during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the
amount was received on his retirement and the sum exceeds the limit of
` 5,000.
Therefore, the entire amount of ` 6,000 is liable to tax as perquisite.
Note – An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is
taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 1,000 and gross total
income would be ` 7,27,769.
(2) Perquisite value of transfer of car: As per Rule 3(7)(viii), the value of benefit
to the employee, arising from the transfer of an asset, being a motor car, by
the employer is the actual cost of the motor car to the employer as reduced
by 20% of WDV of such motor car for each completed year during which such
motor car was put to use by the employer. Therefore, the value of perquisite
on transfer of motor car, in this case, would be:
Particulars
`
Purchase price (30.1.2022) 5,00,000
Less: Depreciation @ 20% 1,00,000
WDV on 29.1.2023 4,00,000
Less: Depreciation @ 20% 80,000
WDV on 29.1.2024 3,20,000
Less: Depreciation @ 20% 64,000
WDV on 29.1.2025 2,56,000
Less: Amount recovered 2,00,000
Value of perquisite 56,000
The rate of 15% as well as the straight line method adopted by the company
for depreciation of vehicle is not relevant for calculation of perquisite value
of car in the hands of Mr. X.
(3) Taxable gratuity
Particulars
`
Gratuity received 6,00,000
Less : Exempt under section 10(10) - Least of the following:
(i) Notified limit = ` 20,00,000
(ii) Actual gratuity = ` 6,00,000
(iii) 15/26 x last drawn salary x no. of completed years
of services or part in excess of 6 months
15/26 x ` 30,000 x 30 = ` 5,19,231 5,19,231
Taxable Gratuity 80,769
Note: As per the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, D.A. is included in the meaning
of salary. Since in this case, Mr. X is covered under payment of Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972, D.A. has to be included within the meaning of salary for
computation of exemption under section 10(10).
(4) Taxable leave encashment
Particulars
`
Leave Salary received 3,30,000
Less : Exempt under section 10(10AA) - Least of the following:
(i) Notified limit ` 25,00,000
(ii) Actual leave salary ` 3,30,000
(iii) 10 months x ` 20,000 ` 2,00,000
(iv) Cash equivalent of leave to his credit ` 2,20,000
330 
 ×20,000
2,00,000
 30 
Taxable Leave encashment 1,30,000
Note – It has been assumed that dearness allowance does not form part of
salary for retirement benefits. In case it is assumed that dearness allowance
forms part of pay for retirement benefits, then, the third limit for exemption
under section 10(10AA) in respect of leave encashment would be ` 3,00,000
(i.e. 10 x ` 30,000) and the fourth limit ` 3,30,000, in which case, the taxable
leave encashment would be ` 30,000 (` 3,30,000-` 3,00,000). In such a case,
the gross total income would be ` 6,32,769.
(5) Commuted Pension
Since Mr. X is a non-government employee in receipt of gratuity, exemption
under section 10(10A) would be available to the extent of 1/3rd of the amount
of the pension which he would have received had he commuted the whole of
the pension.
Particulars
`
Amount received 3,00,000
1  3
Less: Exemption under section 10(10A) = ×3,00,000×  1,50,000
3  2
Taxable amount 1,50,000
(6) The taxability provisions under section 56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of
television received from colleagues, since television is not included in the
definition of property therein.
ILLUSTRATION 21
Shri Bala employed in ABC Co. Ltd. as Finance Manager gives you the list of
perquisites provided by the company to him for the entire financial year 2024-25:
(i) Domestic servant was provided at the residence of Bala. Salary of domestic
servant is ` 1,500 per month. The servant was engaged by him and the salary
is reimbursed by the company (employer).
In case the company has employed the domestic servant, what is the value of
perquisite?
(ii) Free education was provided to his two children Arthy and Ashok in a school
maintained and owned by the company. The cost of such education for Arthy
is computed at ` 900 per month and for Ashok at ` 1,200 per month. No amount
was recovered by the company for such education facility from Bala.
(iii) The employer has provided movable assets such as television, refrigerator and
air-conditioner at the residence of Bala. The actual cost of such assets provided
to the employee is ` 1,10,000.
(iv) A gift voucher worth ` 10,000 was given on the occasion of his marriage
anniversary. It is given by the company to all employees above certain grade.
(v) Telephone provided at the residence of Shri Bala and the bill aggregating to
` 25,000 paid by the employer.
(vi) Housing loan @ 6% per annum. Amount outstanding on 1.4.2024 is
` 6,00,000. Shri Bala pays ` 12,000 per month towards principal, on 5th of each
month.
Compute the chargeable perquisite in the hands of Mr. Bala for the A.Y. 2025-26.
The lending rate of State Bank of India as on 1.4.2024 for housing loan may be taken
as 10%.
SOLUTION
Taxability of perquisites provided by ABC Co. Ltd. to Shri Bala
(i) Domestic servant was employed by the employee and the salary of such
domestic servant was paid/ reimbursed by the employer. It is taxable as
perquisite for all categories of employees.
Taxable perquisite value = ` 1,500 × 12 = ` 18,000.
If the company had employed the domestic servant and the facility of such
servant is given to the employee, then the perquisite is taxable only in the
case of specified employees. The value of the taxable perquisite in such a case
also would be ` 18,000.
(ii) Where the educational institution is owned by the employer, the value of
perquisite in respect of free education facility shall be determined with
reference to the reasonable cost of such education in a similar institution in
or near the locality. However, there would be no perquisite if the cost of such
education per child does not exceed ` 1,000 per month.
Therefore, there would be no perquisite in respect of cost of free education
provided to his child Arthy, since the cost does not exceed ` 1,000 per month.
However, the cost of free education provided to his child Ashok would be
taxable, since the cost exceeds ` 1,000 per month. The taxable perquisite
value would be ` 14,400 (` 1,200 × 12).
Note – An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 1,000 per
month is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 2,400.
(iii) Where the employer has provided movable assets to the employee or any
member of his household, 10% per annum of the actual cost of such asset
owned or the amount of hire charges incurred by the employer shall be the
value of perquisite. However, this will not apply to laptops and computers. In
this case, the movable assets are television, refrigerator and air conditioner
and actual cost of such assets is ` 1,10,000.
The perquisite value would be 10% of the actual cost i.e., ` 11,000, being 10%
of ` 1,10,000.
(iv) The value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the
employee or by member of his household not exceeding ` 5,000 in aggregate
during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the amount was received on
the occasion of marriage anniversary and the sum exceeds the limit of ` 5,000.
Therefore, the entire amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite.
Note - An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is
taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000
(v) Telephone provided at the residence of the employee and payment of bill by
the employer is a tax free perquisite.
(vi) The value of the benefit to the assessee resulting from the provision of
interest-free or concessional loan made available to the employee or any
member of his household during the relevant previous year by the employer
or any person on his behalf shall be determined as the sum equal to the
interest computed at the rate charged per annum by the State Bank of India
(SBI) as on the 1st day of the relevant previous year in respect of loans for the
same purpose advanced by it. This rate should be applied on the maximum
outstanding monthly balance and the resulting amount should be reduced
by the interest, if any, actually paid by him.
“Maximum outstanding monthly balance” means the aggregate outstanding
balance for loan as on the last day of each month.
The perquisite value for computation is 10% - 6% = 4%
Month Maximum outstanding Perquisite value at
balance as on last date 4% for the month (`)
of month (`)
April, 2024 5,88,000 1,960
May, 2024 5,76,000 1,920
June, 2024 5,64,000 1,880
July, 2024 5,52,000 1,840
August, 2024 5,40,000 1,800
September, 2024 5,28,000 1,760
October, 2024 5,16,000 1,720
November, 2024 5,04,000 1,680
December, 2024 4,92,000 1,640
January, 2025 4,80,000 1,600
February, 2025 4,68,000 1,560
March, 2025 4,56,000 1,520
Total value of this perquisite 20,880
Total value of taxable perquisite
= ` 74,280 [i.e. ` 18,000 + ` 14,400 + ` 11,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 20,880].
Note - In case the alternate views are taken for items (ii) & (iv), the total value
of taxable perquisite would be ` 57,280 [i.e., ` 18,000 + ` 2,400 + ` 11,000 +
` 5,000 + ` 20,880].
(H) Valuation of specified security or sweat equity share for the purpose of
section 17(2)(vi) [Sub-rule (8)]
The fair market value of any specified security or sweat equity share, being an
equity share in a company, on the date on which the option is exercised by the
employee, shall be determined in the following manner -
(1) If shares are listed on recognized stock exchange - In a case where, on the
date of the exercising of the option, the share in the company is listed on a
recognized stock exchange, the fair market value shall be the average of the
opening price and closing price of the share on that date on the said stock
exchange.
If shares are listed on more than one recognized stock exchange -Where,
on the date of exercising of the option, the share is listed on more than one
recognized stock exchanges, the fair market value shall be the average of
opening price and closing price of the share on the recognised stock
exchange which records the highest volume of trading in the share.
If no trading in share on recognized stock exchange - Where on the date
of exercising of the option, there is no trading in the share on any recognized
stock exchange, the fair market value shall be -
(a) the closing price of the share on any recognised stock exchange on a
date closest to the date of exercising of the option and immediately
preceding such date; or
(b) the closing price of the share on a recognised stock exchange, which
records the highest volume of trading in such share, if the closing price,
as on the date closest to the date of exercising of the option and
immediately preceding such date, is recorded on more than one
recognized stock exchange.
“Closing price” of a share on a recognised stock exchange on a date shall be
the price of the last settlement on such date on such stock exchange.
However, where the stock exchange quotes both “buy” and “sell” prices, the
closing price shall be the “sell” price of the last settlement.
“Opening price” of a share on a recognised stock exchange on a date shall
be the price of the first settlement on such date on such stock exchange.
However, where the stock exchange quotes both “buy” and “sell” prices, the
opening price shall be the “sell” price of the first settlement.
(2) If shares are not listed on recognized stock exchange -In a case where, on
the date of exercising of the option, the share in the company is not listed on a
recognised stock exchange, the fair market value shall be such value of the share
in the company as determined by a merchant banker on the specified date.
For this purpose, “specified date” means,—
(i) the date of exercising of the option; or
(ii) any date earlier than the date of the exercising of the option, not being
a date which is more than 180 days earlier than the date of the
exercising.
Note: Where any amount has been recovered from the employee, the same shall
be deducted to arrive at the value of perquisites.
ILLUSTRATION 22
AB Co. Ltd. allotted 1000 sweat equity shares to Sri Chand in June 2024. The shares were
allotted at ` 200 per share as against the fair market value of ` 300 per share on the
date of exercise of option by the allottee viz. Sri Chand. The fair market value was
computed in accordance with the method prescribed under the Act.
(i) What is the perquisite value of sweat equity shares allotted to Sri Chand?
(ii) In the case of subsequent sale of those shares by Sri Chand, what would be the
cost of acquisition of those sweat equity shares?
SOLUTION
(i) As per section 17(2)(vi), the value of sweat equity shares chargeable to tax as
perquisite shall be the fair market value of such shares on the date on which
the option is exercised by the assessee as reduced by the amount actually
paid by, or recovered from, the assessee in respect of such shares.
Particulars
`
Fair market value of 1000 sweat equity shares @ ` 300 each 3,00,000
Less: Amount recovered from Sri Chand 1000 shares @ ` 200 each 2,00,000
Value of perquisite of sweat equity shares allotted to Sri 1,00,000
Chand
(ii) As per section 49(2AA), where capital gain arises from transfer of sweat equity
shares, the cost of acquisition of such shares shall be the fair market value
which has been taken into account for perquisite valuation under section
17(2)(vi). (The provisions of section 49 are discussed in Unit 4: Capital Gains of
this chapter)
Therefore, in case of subsequent sale of sweat equity shares by Sri Chand, the
cost of acquisition would be ` 3,00,000.
(I) Valuation of specified security, not being an equity share in a company
for the purpose of section 17(2)(vi) [Sub-rule (9)]
The fair market value of any specified security, not being an equity share in a
company, on the date on which the option is exercised by the employee, shall be
such value as determined by a merchant banker on the specified date.
For this purpose, “specified date” means,—
(i) the date of exercising of the option; or
(ii) any date earlier than the date of the exercising of the option, not being a date
which is more than 180 days earlier than the date of the exercising.
Tax on perquisite of specified securities and sweat equity shares is required to be
paid in the year of exercising of option. However, where such shares or securities
are allotted by the current employer, being an eligible start-up§, the perquisite is
taxable in the year
- after the expiry of 48 months from the end of the relevant assessment year
- in which sale of such security or share are made by the assessee
- in which the assessee ceases to be the employee of the employer,
whichever is earlier.
Definitions for the purpose of perquisite rules -
The following definitions are relevant for applying the perquisite valuation rules -
Term Meaning
Member of shall include-
household (a) spouse(s),
§Referred to in section 80-IAC, which will be dealt with in detail at the Final level
(b) children and their spouses,
(c) parents, and
(d) servants and dependants;
Salary includes the pay, allowances, bonus or commission payable
monthly or otherwise or any monetary payment, by whatever
name called from one or more employers, as the case may be,
but does not include the following, namely:-
(a) dearness allowance or dearness pay unless it enters into the
computation of superannuation or retirement benefits of the
employee concerned;
(b) employer’s contribution to the provident fund account of the
employee;
(c) allowances which are exempted from payment of tax;
(d) the value of perquisites specified in clause (2) of section 17
of the Income-tax Act;
(e) any payment or expenditure specifically excluded under
proviso to clause (2) of section 17;
(f) lump-sum payments received at the time of termination of
service or superannuation or voluntary retirement, like gratuity,
severance pay, leave encashment, voluntary retrenchment
benefits, commutation of pension and similar payments;
ILLUSTRATION 23
X Ltd. provided the following perquisites to its employee Mr. Y for the P.Y. 2024-25 –
(1) Accommodation taken on lease by X Ltd. for ` 15,000 p.m. ` 5,000 p.m. is
recovered from the salary of Mr. Y.
(2) Furniture, for which the hire charges paid by X Ltd. is ` 3,000 p.m. No amount
is recovered from the employee in respect of the same.
(3) A car of 1,200 cc which is owned by X Ltd. and given to Mr. Y to be used both
for official and personal purposes. All running and maintenance expenses are
fully met by the employer. He is also provided with a chauffeur.
(4) A gift voucher of ` 10,000 on his birthday.
Compute the value of perquisites chargeable to tax for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming his
salary for perquisite valuation to be ` 10 lakh.
SOLUTION
Computation of the value of perquisites chargeable to tax in the hands of
Mr. Y for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Amount in `
(1) Value of accommodation at
concessional rate
Actual amount of lease rental paid by 1,80,000
X Ltd.
10% of salary i.e., 10% of ` 10,00,000 1,00,000
Lower of the above 1,00,000
Less: Rent paid by Mr. Y (` 5,000 × 12) 60,000
40,000
Add: Hire charges paid by X Ltd. for
furniture provided for the use of Mr.
Y (` 3,000 × 12) 36,000 76,000
(2) Perquisite value of Santro car owned by
X Ltd. and provided to Mr. Y for his 32,400
personal and official use [(` 1,800 +
` 900) × 12]
(3) Value of gift voucher* 10,000
Value of perquisites chargeable to tax 1,18,400
* An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable. In
such a case, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000.
1.4 DEDUCTIONS FROM SALARY
The income chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’ is computed after making the
following deductions:
(1) Standard deduction [Section 16(ia)]
(2) Entertainment allowance [Section 16(ii)]
(3) Professional tax [Section 16(iii)]
Income under the head “Salaries” Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Salary/Bonus/Commission etc. A
Taxable Allowance B
Value of Taxable Perquisites C
Gross Salary (A+B+C) D
Less: Deductions under Section 16
Standard deduction [Upto ` 50,000 if the assessee xxx
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and upto
` 75,000 if the assessee is paying tax under default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
Entertainment Allowance to Government employee, xxx
if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A)
Professional Tax paid, if the assessee exercises the xxx E
option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)
Net taxable income from Salary (D-E) F
1.4.1 Standard Deduction
A standard deduction of ` 50,000 or the amount of salary, whichever is lower, is to
be provided to the employees if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
However, if the assessee is paying tax under default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A), standard deduction of ` 75,000 or the amount of salary, whichever is
lower, is to be provided to the employees.
1.4.2 Entertainment allowance
Entertainment allowance received is fully taxable and is first to be included in the
salary and thereafter the following deduction is to be made from gross salary.
However, deduction in respect of entertainment allowance is available in case of
Government employees only. The amount of deduction will be lower of:
(i) One-fifth of his basic salary or
(ii) ` 5,000 or
(iii) Entertainment allowance received.
Amount actually spent by the employee towards entertainment out of the
entertainment allowance received by him is not a relevant consideration at all.
Deduction in respect of entertainment allowance would be available to an
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The deduction would not be
available under the default tax regime i.e., under section 115BAC.
1.4.3 Professional tax on employment
Professional tax or taxes on employment levied by a State under Article 276 of the
Constitution is allowed as deduction only when it is actually paid by the employee
during the previous year. The total amount by way of professional tax payable in
respect of any one person shall not exceed ` 2,500 per annum. However, the
amount paid during the previous year can be more than ` 2,500 as the employee
may have paid the professional tax of an earlier year during the previous year.
• If professional tax is reimbursed or directly paid by the employer on
behalf of the employee, the amount so paid is first included as salary
income and then allowed as a deduction u/s 16.
• Deduction in respect of professional tax would be available to an assessee only
if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). The deduction would not be available under the default tax
regime i.e., under section 115BAC.
ILLUSTRATION 24
Mr. Goyal receives the following emoluments during the previous year ending
31.03.2025.
Basic pay ` 4,00,000
Dearness Allowance ` 1,50,000
Commission ` 1,00,000
Entertainment allowance ` 40,000
Medical expenses reimbursed ` 25,000
Professional tax paid ` 2,000 (` 1,000 was paid by his employer)
Mr. Goyal contributes ` 5,000 towards recognized provident fund. He has no other
income. Determine the income from salary for A.Y. 2025-26, if Mr. Goyal is a State
Government employee.
SOLUTION
Computation of salary of Mr. Goyal for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Particulars
`
Basic Salary 4,00,000
Dearness Allowance 1,50,000
Commission 1,00,000
Entertainment Allowance received 40,000
Employee’s contribution to RPF [Note] -
Medical expenses reimbursed 25,000
Professional tax paid by the employer 1,000
Gross Salary 7,16,000
Less: Deductions under section 16(ia) - Standard deduction of upto
` 75,000 75,000
Income from Salary 6,41,000
Note: Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction u/s
80C. However, such deduction shall not be available under the default tax regime
under section 115BAC.
Computation of salary of Mr. Goyal for the A.Y.2025-26 under the optional tax
regime (normal provisions of the Act)
Particulars
` `
Basic Salary 4,00,000
Dearness Allowance 1,50,000
Commission 1,00,000
Entertainment Allowance received 40,000
Employee’s contribution to RPF [Note] -
Medical expenses reimbursed 25,000
Professional tax paid by the employer 1,000
Gross Salary 7,16,000
Less: Deductions under section 16
under section 16(ia) - Standard deduction of upto 50,000
` 50,000
under section 16(ii) - Entertainment allowance being
lowest of :
(a) Allowance received 40,000
(b) One fifth of basic salary [1/5 × ` 4,00,000] 80,000
(c) Statutory amount 5,000 5,000
under section 16(iii) - Professional tax paid 2,000
Income from Salary 6,59,000
Note: Employee’s contribution to RPF is not taxable. It is eligible for deduction u/s 80C.
1.5 RELIEF UNDER SECTION 89
(1) On account of arrears of salary or advance salary: Where by reason of any
portion of an assessee’s salary being paid in arrears or in advance or by
reason of his having received in any one financial year, salary for more than
twelve months or a payment of profit in lieu of salary under section 17(3), his
income is assessed at a rate higher than that at which it would otherwise have
been assessed, the Assessing Officer shall, on an application made to him in
this behalf, grant such relief as prescribed. The procedure for computing the
relief is given in Rule 21A.
(2) On account of family pension: Similar tax relief is extended to assessees
who receive arrears of family pension as defined in the Explanation to clause
(iia) of section 57.
“Family pension” means a regular monthly amount payable by the employer
to a person belonging to the family of an employee in the event of his death.
(3) No relief at the time of Voluntary retirement or termination of service:
No relief shall be granted in respect of any amount received or receivable by
an assessee on his voluntary retirement or termination of his service, in
accordance with any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement or a scheme
of voluntary separation (in the case of a public sector company), if exemption
under section 10(10C) in respect of such compensation received on voluntary
retirement or termination of his service or voluntary separation has been
claimed by the assessee in respect of the same assessment year or any other
assessment year.
ILLUSTRATION 25
In the case of Mr. Hari, who turned 72 years on 28.3.2025, you are informed that the
salary (computed) for the previous year 2024-25 is ` 10,20,000 and arrears of salary
received is ` 3,45,000. Further, you are given the following details relating to the
earlier years to which the arrears of salary received is attributable to:
Previous year Taxable Salary (`) Arrears now received (`)
2010 – 2011 7,10,000 1,03,000
2011 – 2012 8,25,000 1,17,000
2012 – 2013 9,50,000 1,25,000
Compute the relief available under section 89 and the tax payable for the A.Y. 2025-26.
Assume that Mr. Hari exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Note: Rates of Taxes:
Assessment Slab rates of income-tax
Year
For resident individuals of the age For other resident individuals
of 60 years or more at any time
during the previous year
Slabs Rate Slabs Rate
2011–12 Upto ` 2,40,000 Nil Upto ` 1,60,000 Nil
` 2,40,001 - ` 5,00,000 10% ` 1,60,001 - ` 5,00,000 10%
` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000 20% ` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000 20%
Above ` 8,00,000 30% Above ` 8,00,000 30%
2012–13 Upto ` 2,50,000 Nil Upto ` 1,80,000 Nil
` 2,50,001 - ` 5,00,000 10% ` 1,80,001 - ` 5,00,000 10%
` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000 20% ` 5,00,001 - ` 8,00,000 20%
Above ` 8,00,000 30% Above ` 8,00,000 30%
Assessment Slab rates of income-tax
Year
For resident individuals of the age For other resident individuals
of 60 years or more at any time
during the previous year
Slabs Rate Slabs Rate
2013–14 Upto ` 2,50,000 Nil Upto ` 2,00,000 Nil
` 2,50,001 - ` 5,00,000 10% ` 2,00,001 - ` 5,00,000 10%
` 5,00,001 - ` 10,00,000 20% ` 5,00,001 - ` 10,00,000 20%
Above ` 10,00,000 30% Above ` 10,00,000 30%
Note – Education cess@2% and secondary and higher education cess@1% was attracted
on the income-tax for all above preceding years.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax payable by Mr. Hari for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Incl. arrears of Excl. arrears
salary of salary
` `
Current year salary (computed) 10,20,000 10,20,000
Add: Arrears of salary 3,45,000 -
Taxable Salary 13,65,000 10,20,000
Income-tax thereon 2,19,500 1,16,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% 8,780 4,640
Total payable 2,28,280 1,20,640
Computation of tax payable on arrears of salary if charged to tax in the
respective AYs
A.Y. 2011-12 A.Y. 2012-13 A.Y. 2013-14
Particulars
Incl. Excl. Incl. Excl. Incl. Excl.
arrears arrears arrears arrears arrears arrears
(`) (`) (`) (`) (`) (`)
Taxable salary 7,10,000 7,10,000 8,25,000 8,25,000 9,50,000 9,50,000
Add: Arrears of 1,03,000 - 1,17,000 - 1,25,000 -
salary
Taxable salary 8,13,000 7,10,000 9,42,000 8,25,000 10,75,000 9,50,000
Tax on the above 97,900 76,000 1,34,600 99,500 1,47,500 1,15,000
Add: Cess@3% 2,937 2,280 4,038 2,985 4,425 3,450
Tax payable 1,00,837 78,280 1,38,638 1,02,485 1,51,925 1,18,450
Computation of relief under section 89
Particulars
` `
i Tax payable in A.Y.2025-26 on arrears:
Tax on income including arrears 2,28,280
Less : Tax on income excluding arrears 1,20,640 1,07,640
ii Tax payable in respective years on arrears :
Tax on income including arrears (` 1,00,837 + ` 1,38,638 3,91,400
+ ` 1,51,925)
Less: Tax on income excluding arrears (` 78,280 + 2,99,215 92,185
` 1,02,485 + ` 1,18,450)
Relief under section 89 - difference between tax on 15,455
arrears in A.Y. 2025-26 and tax on arrears in the
respective years
Tax payable for A.Y.2025-26 after relief under section 89
Particulars
`
Income-tax payable on total income including arrears of salary 2,28,280
Less : Relief under section 89 as computed above 15,455
Tax payable after claiming relief 2,12,825
LET US RECAPITULATE
Basis of Charge [Section 15]
(i) Salary is chargeable to tax either on ‘due’ basis or on ‘receipt’ basis, whichever
is earlier.
(ii) However, where any salary, paid in advance, is assessed in the year of
payment, it cannot be subsequently brought to tax in the year in which it
becomes due.
(iii) If the salary paid in arrears has already been assessed on due basis, the same
cannot be taxed again when it is paid.
If an employee works with more than one employer, salaries received from all the
employers would be clubbed and brought to charge for the relevant previous year.
Taxability/Exemption of certain Allowances
Section Allowance Exemption
10(13A) House Rent Least of the following is exempt:
Allowance
(a) HRA actually received
(b) Rent paid less 10% of salary
(c) 50% of salary, if accommodation is located
in Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi or Chennai
40% of salary, if the accommodation is
located in any other city.
Note - Exemption would be available to an
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
10(14)(ii) Children education ` 100 per month per child upto maximum of two
allowance children
Note - Exemption would be available to an
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
Transport ` 3,200 per month for an employee who is blind
allowance for or deaf and dumb or orthopedically handicapped
commuting Note - Exemption in respect of transport
between the place allowance would be available to an assessee
of residence and irrespective of the regime under which he pays
the place of duty tax.
Hostel expenditure ` 300 per month per child up to a maximum of
of employee’s two children
children Note - Exemption would be available to an
assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
Exemption of Terminal Benefits [Exemption would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the tax regime under which he pays tax]
Section Component of Category of Particulars [Taxability / Exemption
salary employee under section 10]
10(10) Gratuity Central Fully exempt u/s 10(10)(i)
Government
employees/
Members of
Civil Services/
local
authority
employees
etc.
Other Least of the following is exempt:
employees
(i) Gratuity actually received
In case of employees covered by the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
(ii) 15/26 x last drawn salary x
number of completed years or
part in excess of six months
(iii) ` 20,00,000
In case of employees not covered
by the Payment of Gratuity Act,
(ii) 1/2 x average salary of last 10
months x number of completed
years of service (fraction to be
ignored).
(iii) ` 20,00,000
10(10A) Pension
Uncommuted pension Government Fully taxable
& Non-
Government
employees
Commuted pension Employees of Fully exempt under section 10(10A)(i)
Central
Government/
local
authorities/
Statutory
corporation/
members of
Civil services/
All-India
services/
Defence
Services
Other If the employee is in receipt of
Employees gratuity
1/3 x (commuted pension received ÷
commutation %) x 100
If the employee is not in receipt of
gratuity
1/2 x (commuted pension received ÷
commutation %) x 100
10(10AA) Leave Salary
Received during service Government Fully taxable
& Non-
Government
Received at the time of Government Fully exempt u/s 10(10AA)(i)
retirement, (whether on
Non- Least of the following is exempt :
superannuation or
Government (i) ` 25,00,000
otherwise)
(ii) Leave salary actually received
(iii) Cash equivalent of leave standing
at the credit of the employee
[based on average salary of last 10
months] (maximum 30 days for
every year of service)
(iv) 10 months’ salary (based on
average salary of last 10 months
preceding retirement)
10(10B) Retrenchment Least of the following is exempt :
Compensation
(i) Compensation actually
received
(ii) ` 5,00,000
(iii) 15 days average pay ×
Completed years of service and
part thereof in excess of 6
months
10(10C) Voluntary Retirement Central and Least of the following is exempt :
Compensation State
(i) Compensation actually
Government,
received
Public sector
(ii) ` 5,00,000
company, any
other (iii) 3 months’ salary x completed
company, years of service
local
(iv) Last drawn salary x remaining
authority, co-
months of services left
operative
society, IIT etc.
Section 10(5) [Leave Travel Concession]
Exemption is available for 2 trips in a block of 4 calendar years. Exemption would be
available to an assessee only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
S. No. Journey performed by Exemption
1 Air Amount not exceeding air economy fare by
the shortest route.
2 Any other mode :
(i) Where rail service is Amount not exceeding air-conditioned first-
available class rail fare by the shortest route to the
place of destination
(ii) Where rail service is not
available
a) and public transport Amount equivalent to air conditioned first
does not exist class rail fares by the shortest route, as if the
journey had been performed by rail
b) but public transport Amount not exceeding the first class or deluxe
exists. class fare by the shortest route to the place of
destination
Provident Funds - Exemption & Taxability provisions
Particulars Recognized PF Unrecognized Statutory PF Public PF
PF
Employer’s Contribution in Not taxable at Fully exempt N.A. (as
excess of 12% of the time of there is only
Contribution salary is taxable as contribution assessee’s
“salary” u/s 17(1) own
contribution)
Employee’s Eligible for Not eligible for Eligible for Eligible for
Contribution deduction u/s 80C, deduction deduction u/s deduction
where an employee 80C, where an u/s 80C,
exercises the employee where an
option of shifting exercises the employee
out of the default option of exercises the
tax regime shifting out of option of
provided under the default shifting out
section 115BAC(1A) tax regime of the
provided default tax
under section regime
115BAC(1A) provided
under
section
115BAC(1A)
Interest Credited Amount in excess Not taxable at Fully exempt N.A.
on Employer’s of 9.5% p.a. is the time of
Contribution taxable as “salary” credit of
u/s 17(1) interest
Interest Credited Amount in excess Not taxable at Exempt upto Fully exempt
on Employee’s of 9.5% p.a. is the time of certain limit
Contribution taxable as “salary” credit of of
u/s 17(1) [See Note interest contribution
below] [See Note
below]
Amount Exempt from tax if Employer’s Fully exempt Fully exempt
withdrawn on (i) employee served contribution u/s 10(11) u/s 10(11)
retirement/ a continuous and interest
termination period of 5 years thereon is
or more; or taxable as
salary.
(ii) retires before
Employee’s
rendering 5
contribution is
years of service
not taxable.
because of ill
Interest on
health,
employee’s
contraction or
contribution is
discontinuance
taxable under
of employer’s
income from
business or
other source.
reason beyond
the control of
the employee; or
(iii) on cessation
of employment,
the employee
obtains
employment
with any other
employer, to the
extent the
accumulated
balance in RPF is
transferred to his
RPF account
maintained by
the new
employer.
(iv) The entire
balance standing
to the credit of
the employee is
transferred to his
NPS account
referred to in
section 80CCD
and notified by
the Central
Government
In other cases, it
will be taxable.
As per section 10(11), any payment from a Provident Fund (PF) to which Provident Fund
Act, 1925, applies or from Public Provident Fund would be exempt.
Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an employee participating in a
Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be exempt under section 10(12).
However, the exemption under section 10(11) or 10(12) would not be available in respect
of income by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates to
the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by that
person/employee exceeding ` 2,50,000 in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1st
April, 2021.
If the contribution by such person/employee is in a fund in which there is no employer’s
contribution, then, a higher limit of ` 5,00,000 would be applicable for such contribution,
and interest accrued in any previous year in that fund, on or after 1st April, 2021 would
be exempt upto that limit.
It may be noted that interest accrued on contribution to such funds upto 31st March,
2021 would be exempt without any limit, even if the accrual of income is after that date.
Valuation of Perquisites [Section 17(2) read with Rule 3]
(I) Rent-free residential accommodation/ Accommodation provided to an
employee at concessional rate
S. No. Category of Unfurnished accommodation Furnished
(A) Employee accommodation
(B) (C) (D)
1 Government License fee determined as per Value determined
employee Government rules as reduced by the under column (C)
rent actually paid by the employee.
Add: 10% p.a. of the
furniture cost.
However, if the
furniture is hired,
then hire charges
payable/paid should
be added to the
value determined
under column (C),
as reduced by
charges recovered
from employee.
2 Non- Where accommodation is owned Value determined
government by employer under column (C)
employee
Location Perquisite
Add: 10% p.a. of the
furniture cost.
value
In cities having a 10% of salary
population > 40
However, if the
lakhs as per 2011
furniture is hired,
census
then hire charges
In cities having a 7.5% of salary payable/paid should
population > 15 be added to the value
lakhs ≤ 40 lakhs
as per 2011 determined under
census column (C),
as reduced by
In other areas 5% of salary
charges recovered
The perquisite value should be from employee.
arrived at by reducing the rent, if any,
actually paid by the employee, from
the above value.
Where the accommodation is taken Value determined
on lease or rent by employer under column (C)
Lower of the following is taxable: Add: 10% p.a. of the
(a) actual amount of lease rent paid furniture cost.
or payable by employer or However, if the
(b) 10% of salary furniture is hired, then
hire charges
The lower of the above should be
payable/paid should
reduced by the rent, actually paid by
be added to the value
the employee, to arrive at the
determined under
perquisite value.
column (C),
as reduced by
charges recovered
from employee.
(II) Interest free or concessional loan
In respect of any loan given by employer to employee or any member of his household
(excluding for medical treatment for specified ailments or where loans amount in
aggregate does not exceed ` 20,000), the interest at the rate charged by SBI as on the
first day of the relevant previous year at maximum outstanding monthly balance
(aggregate outstanding balance for each loan as on the last day of each month) as
reduced by the interest, if any, actually paid by him or any member of his household.
(III) Use of movable assets by employee/ any member of his household
Asset given Value of benefit
(a) Use of laptops and Nil
computers
(b) Movable assets, other 10% p.a. of the actual cost of such asset, or the
than - amount of rent or charge paid, or payable by the
(i) laptops and employer, as the case may be
computers; and (-)
(ii) assets already Amount paid by/ recovered from an
specified employee
(IV) Transfer of movable assets
Actual cost of asset to employer (-) cost of normal wear and tear (-) amount paid or
recovered from employee
Assets transferred Value of perquisite
Computers and electronic items @50% on WDV for each completed year of usage
Motor cars @20% on WDV for each completed year of usage
Any other asset @10% of actual cost of such asset to employer for
each completed year of usage [on SLM basis]
(V) Motor car
S. No. Car Expenses Wholly Partly personal use (c)
owned/ met by official use
hired by
1 Employer Employer Not a
cc of engine Perquisite value
perquisite*
upto 1.6 litres ` 1,800 p.m.
above 1.6 litres ` 2,400 p.m.
If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900 p.m.
should be added to the above value.
2 Employee Employer Not a Actual amount of expenditure
perquisite* incurred by the employer as reduced
by the perquisite value arrived at in
(1) above.
3 Employer Employee -
cc of engine Perquisite value
upto 1.6 litres ` 600 p.m.
above 1.6 litres ` 900 p.m.
If chauffeur is also provided, ` 900
p.m. should be added to the above
value.
* Provided employer maintains the complete details of such journey and expenditure thereon
and gives a certificate that such expenditure are incurred wholly for official use.
Note: Where car is owned by employer and expenses are also met by the employer, the
taxable perquisites in case such car is used wholly for personal purposes of the
employee would be equal to the actual expenditure incurred by the employer on
running and maintenance expenses and normal wear and tear (calculated @10% p.a. of
actual cost of motor car) less amount charged from the employee for such use.
Meaning of Salary:
S. No. Calculation of exemption of Meaning of salary
Allowance/Terminal benefit/Valuation
of perquisite
1 Gratuity Basic salary and dearness
(in case of non-Government employees allowance.
covered by the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972)
2 a) Gratuity (in case of non- Government Basic salary and dearness
employee not covered by Payment of allowance, if provided in terms
Gratuity Act, 1972) of employment, and
commission calculated as a
b) Leave Salary
fixed percentage of turnover.
c) House Rent Allowance
d) Recognized Provident Fund
e) Voluntary Retirement Compensation
3 Rent free accommodation and All pay, allowance, bonus or
Accommodation provided to an employee commission or any monetary
at a concessional rate payment by whatever name
called but excludes-
(1) Dearness allowance not
forming part of
computation of
superannuation or
retirement benefit
(2) employer’s contribution to
the provident fund
account of the employee;
(3) allowances which are
exempted from the
payment of tax;
(4) value of the perquisites
specified in section 17(2);
(5) any payment or
expenditure specifically
excluded under the
proviso to section 17(2)
i.e., payment of medical
insurance premium
specified therein.
(6) lump-sum payments
received at the time of
termination of service or
superannuation or
voluntary retirement, like
gratuity, leave
encashment, voluntary
retirement benefits,
commutation of pension
and similar payments.
Deductions from gross salary [Section 16]
(1) Standard deduction [Section 16(ia)]
Standard deduction of upto ` 75,000 under default tax regime under section
115BAC.
Standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 under normal provisions of the Act.
(2) Entertainment allowance (allowable only in the case of government
employees) [Section 16(ii)]
Least of the following is allowed as deduction:
(1) ` 5,000
(2) 1/5th of basic salary
(3) Actual entertainment allowance received
Note - Deduction would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
(3) Professional tax [Section 16(iii)]
Any sum paid by the assessee on account of tax on employment is allowable
as deduction.
In case professional tax is paid by employer on behalf of employee, the amount
paid shall be included in gross salary as a perquisite and then deduction can be
claimed.
Note - Deduction would be available to an assessee only if he exercises the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
Relief when salary is paid in arrears or in advance [Section 89]
Step 1 Calculate tax payable of the previous year in which the arrears/advance salary
is received by considering:
(a) Total Income inclusive of additional salary
(b) Total Income exclusive of additional salary
Step 2 Compute the difference the tax calculated in Step 1 and Step 2 [i.e., (a) – (b)]
Step 3 Calculate the tax payable of every previous year to which the additional salary
relates:
(a) On total income including additional salary of that particular previous
year
(b) On total income excluding additional salary.
Step 4 Calculate the difference between (a) and (b) in Step 3 for every previous year
to which the additional salary relates and aggregate the same.
Step 5 Relief under section 89(1) = Amount calculated in Step 2 – Amount calculated
in Step 4
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Mohit is employed with XY Ltd. on a basic salary of ` 10,000 p.m. He is also
entitled to dearness allowance @100% of basic salary, 50% of which is included
in salary as per terms of employment. The company gives him house rent
allowance of ` 6,000 p.m. which was increased to ` 7,000 p.m. with effect from
01.01.2025. He also got an increment of ` 1,000 p.m. in his basic salary with
effect from 01.02.2025. Rent paid by him during the P.Y.2024-25 is as under:
April and May, 2024- Nil, as he stayed with his parents
June to October, 2024 - ` 6,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Ghaziabad
November, 2024 to March, 2025 - ` 8,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Delhi
Compute his gross salary for A.Y.2025-26, assuming he exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. Ms. Rakhi is an employee in a private company. She receives the following
medical benefits from the company during the previous year 2024-25:
Particulars `
1 Reimbursement of following medical expenses incurred
by Ms. Rakhi
(A) On treatment of her self-employed daughter in a 4,000
private clinic
(B) On treatment of herself by family doctor 8,000
(C) On treatment of her mother-in-law dependent on 5,000
her, in a nursing home
2 Payment of premium on Mediclaim Policy taken on her 7,500
health
3 Medical Allowance 2,000 p.m.
4 Medical expenses reimbursed on her son's treatment in 5,000
a government hospital
5 Expenses incurred by company on the treatment of her 1,05,000
minor son abroad including stay expenses
6 Expenses in relation to foreign travel of Rakhi and her 1,20,000
son for medical treatment
Note - Limit prescribed by RBI for expenditure on
medical treatment and stay abroad is USD 2,50,000 per
financial year under liberalized remittance scheme.
Examine the taxability of the above benefits and allowances in the hands of
Rakhi.
3. Mr. X is employed with AB Ltd. on a monthly salary of ` 25,000 per month and
an entertainment allowance and commission of ` 1,000 p.m. each. The
company provides him with the following benefits:
(i) A company owned accommodation is provided to him in Delhi. Furniture
costing ` 2,40,000 was provided on 1.8.2024.
(ii) A personal loan of ` 5,00,000 on 1.7.2024 on which it charges interest @
6.75% p.a. The entire loan is still outstanding (Assume SBI rate of interest
on 1.4.2024 was 12.75% p.a.)
(iii) His son is allowed to use a motor cycle belonging to the company. The
company had purchased this motor cycle for ` 60,000 on 1.5.2021. The
motor cycle was finally sold to him on 1.8.2024 for ` 30,000.
(iv) Professional tax paid by Mr. X is ` 2,000.
Compute the income from salary of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26 assuming Mr. X
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
4. Mr. Balaji, employed as Production Manager in Beta Ltd., furnishes you the
following information for the year ended 31.03.2025:
(i) Basic salary upto 31.10.2024 ` 50,000 p.m.
Basic salary from 01.11.2024 ` 60,000 p.m.
Note - Salary is due and paid on the last day of every month.
(ii) Dearness allowance @ 40% of basic salary.
(iii) Bonus equal to one month salary. Paid in October 2024 on basic salary
plus dearness allowance applicable for that month.
(iv) Contribution of employer to recognized provident fund account of the
employee@16% of basic salary.
(v) Professional tax paid ` 2,500 of which ` 2,000 was paid by the employer.
(vi) Facility of laptop and computer was provided to Balaji for both official
and personal use. Cost of laptop ` 45,000 and computer ` 35,000 were
acquired by the company on 01.12.2024.
(vii) Motor car owned by the employer (cubic capacity of engine exceeds 1.60
litres) provided to the employee from 01.11.2024 meant for both official
and personal use. Repair and running expenses of ` 45,000 from
01.11.2024 to 31.03.2025, were fully met by the employer. The motor car
was self-driven by the employee.
(viii) Leave travel concession given to employee, his wife and three children
(one daughter aged 7 and twin sons aged 3). Cost of air tickets (economy
class) reimbursed by the employer ` 30,000 for adults and ` 45,000 for
three children. Balaji is eligible for availing exemption this year to the
extent it is permissible in law.
Compute the salary income chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. Balaji for the
A.Y. 2025-26 assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
5. From the following details, find out the salary chargeable to tax for the
A.Y.2025-26 assuming he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) -
Mr. X is a regular employee of Rama & Co., in Gurgaon. He was appointed on
1.1.2024 in the scale of ` 20,000 - ` 1,000 - ` 30,000. He is paid 10% D.A. &
Bonus equivalent to one month pay based on salary of March every year. He
contributes 15% of his pay and D.A. towards his recognized provident fund and
the company contributes the same amount. DA forms part of pay for retirement
benefits.
He is provided free housing facility which has been taken on rent by the
company at ` 10,000 per month. He is also provided with following facilities:
(i) Facility of laptop costing ` 50,000.
(ii) Company reimbursed the medical treatment bill of his brother of
` 25,000, who is dependent on him.
(iii) The monthly salary of ` 1,000 of a house keeper is reimbursed by the
company.
(iv) A gift voucher of ` 10,000 on the occasion of his marriage anniversary.
(v) Conveyance allowance of ` 1,000 per month is given by the company
towards actual reimbursement of conveyance spent on official duty.
(vi) He is provided personal accident policy for which premium of ` 5,000 is
paid by the company.
(vii) He is getting telephone allowance @` 500 per month.
6. You are required to compute the income from salary of Mr. Raja under default
tax regime from the following particulars for the year ended
31-03-2025:
(i) He retired on 31-12-2024 at the age of 60, after putting in 25 years and
9 months of service, from a private company at Delhi.
(ii) He was paid a salary of ` 25,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of
` 6,000 p.m. He paid rent of ` 6,500 p.m., during his tenure of service.
(iii) On retirement, he was paid a gratuity of ` 3,50,000. He was covered by
the payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. He had not received any other gratuity
at any point of time earlier, other than this gratuity.
(iv) He had accumulated leave of 15 days per annum during the period of his
service; this was encashed by him at the time of his retirement. A sum of
` 3,15,000 was received by him in this regard. Employer allowed 30 days
leave per annum.
(v) He is receiving ` 5,000 as pension. On 1.2.2025, he commuted 60% of his
pension and received ` 3,00,000 as commuted pension.
(vi) The company presented him with a gift voucher of ` 5,000 on his
retirement. His colleagues also gifted him a mobile phone worth
` 50,000 from their own contribution.
7. Ms. Akansha, a salaried employee, furnishes the following details for the
financial year 2024-25:
Particulars `
Basic salary 6,20,000
Dearness allowance 4,20,000
Commission 75,000
Entertainment allowance 9,000
Medical expenses reimbursed by the employer 18,000
Profession tax (of this, 50% paid by employer) 4,000
Health insurance premium paid by employer 8,000
Gift voucher given by employer on her birthday 10,000
Life insurance premium of Akansha paid by employer 26,000
Laptop provided for use at home. Actual cost of Laptop to
employer 45,000
Children of the assessee are also using the Laptop at home]
Employer company owns a Maruti Suzuki Swift car, which was
provided to the assessee, both for official and personal use.
Driver was also provided. (Engine cubic capacity more than 1.6
litres). All expenses are met by the employer
Annual credit card fees paid by employer [Credit card is not
exclusively used for official purposes; details of usage are not 7,000
available]
You are required to compute the income chargeable under the head Salaries
for the assessment year 2025-26 if she pays tax under default tax regime.
ANSWERS
1. Computation of gross salary of Mr. Mohit for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Basic salary [(` 10,000 × 10) + (` 11,000 × 2)] 1,22,000
Dearness Allowance (100% of basic salary) 1,22,000
House Rent Allowance (See Note below) 21,300
Gross Salary 2,65,300
Note: Computation of Taxable House Rent Allowance (HRA)
Particulars April-May June-Oct Nov-Dec Jan Feb-March
(`) (`) (`) (`) (`)
Basic salary per month 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 11,000
Dearness allowance
(included in salary as
per terms of
employment) (50% of 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,500
basic salary)
Salary per month for
the purpose of
computation of house 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 16,500
rent allowance
Relevant period (in 2 5 2 1 2
months
Salary for the relevant
period (Salary per
month × relevant 30,000 75,000 30,000 15,000 33,000
period)
Rent paid for the Nil 30,000 16,000 8,000 16,000
relevant period (` 6,000×5) (` 8,000×2) (` 8,000×1) (` 8,000×2)
House rent allowance 12,000 30,000 12,000 7,000 14,000
(HRA) received during (` 6,000×2) (` 6,000×5) (` 6,000×2) (` 7,000×1) (` 7,000×2)
the relevant period (A)
Least of the following N.A.
is exempt [u/s
10(13A)]
1. Actual HRA - 30,000 12,000 7,000 14,000
received
2. Rent paid (–) 10% - 22,500 13,000 6,500 12,700
of salary
3. 40% of salary - 30,000 15,000 7,500 16,500
(Residence at (40% × (50% × (50% × (50% ×
Ghaziabad – June to ` 75,000) ` 30,000) ` 15,000) ` 33,000)
Oct, 2024)
50% of salary
(Residence at Delhi–
Nov, 24 - March, 25)
Exempt HRA (B) Nil 22,500 12,000 6,500 12,700
Taxable HRA [Actual
HRA (–) Exempt HRA] 12,000 7,500 Nil 500 1,300
(A-B)
Taxable HRA (total) = ` 12,000 + ` 7,500 + ` 500 + ` 1,300 = ` 21,300
2. Tax treatment of medical benefits, allowances and mediclaim premium in
the hands of Ms. Rakhi for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
1. Reimbursement of medical expenses incurred by Ms. Rakhi
(A) The amount of ` 4,000 reimbursed by her employer for
treatment of her self-employed daughter in a private clinic is
taxable perquisite.
(B) The amount of ` 8,000 reimbursed by the employer for
treatment of Ms. Rakhi by family doctor is taxable perquisite.
(C) The amount of ` 5,000 reimbursed by her employer for
treatment of her dependant mother-in-law in a nursing home
is taxable perquisite.
The aggregate sum of ` 17,000, specified in (A), (B) and (C) above,
reimbursed by the employer is taxable perquisite
2. Medical insurance premium of ` 7,500 paid by the employer for
insuring health of Ms. Rakhi is a tax free perquisite as per clause (iii)
of the first proviso to section 17(2).
3. Medical allowance of ` 2,000 per month i.e., ` 24,000 p.a. is a fully
taxable allowance.
4. As per clause (ii)(a) of the first proviso to section 17(2), reimbursement
of medical expenses of ` 5,000 on her son’s treatment in a hospital
maintained by the Government is a tax-free perquisite.
5. As per clause (vi) of the first proviso to section 17(2), the following
& expenditure incurred by the employer would be excluded from
perquisite subject to certain conditions –
6.
(i) Expenditure on medical treatment of the employee, or any
member of the family of such employee, outside India including
stay expenses [` 1,05,000, in this case];
(ii) Expenditure on travel of the employee or any member of the
family of such employee for medical treatment and one
attendant who accompanies the patient in connection with such
treatment [` 1,20,000, in this case].
The conditions subject to which the above expenditure would be
exempt are as follows –
(i) The expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad would be
excluded from perquisite to the extent permitted by Reserve Bank
of India;
(ii) The expenditure on travel would be excluded from perquisite
only in the case of an employee whose gross total income, as
computed before including the said expenditure, does not
exceed ` 2 lakh.
Since the expenditure on medical treatment and stay abroad does
not exceed the limit permitted by RBI, they would be fully exempt.
However, the foreign travel expenditure of Ms. Rakhi and her minor
son borne by the employer would be excluded from perquisite only
if the gross total income of Ms. Rakhi, as computed before including
the said expenditure, does not exceed ` 2 lakh.
3. Computation of Income from Salary of Mr. X for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Basic salary [` 25,000 × 12] 3,00,000
Commission [` 1,000 × 12] 12,000
Entertainment allowance [` 1,000 × 12] 12,000
Rent free accommodation [Note 1] 32,400
Add : Value of furniture [` 2,40,000 × 10% p.a. for 8 16,000 48,400
months]
Interest on personal loan [Note 2] 22,500
Use of motor cycle [` 60,000 × 10% p.a. for 4 months] 2,000
Transfer of motor cycle [Note 3] 12,000
Gross Salary 4,08,900
Less : Deduction under section 16
Under section 16(ia) – Standard deduction 50,000
Under section 16(iii) - Professional tax paid 2,000 52,000
Income from Salary 3,56,900
Notes:
1. Value of rent-free unfurnished accommodation
= 10% of salary for the relevant period
= 10% of (` 3,00,000 + ` 12,000 + ` 12,000) = ` 32,400
2. Value of perquisite for interest on personal loan
= [` 5,00,000 × (12.75% - 6.75%) for 9 months] = ` 22,500
3. Depreciated value of the motor cycle
= Original cost – Depreciation @ 10% p.a. for 3 completed years.
= ` 60,000 – (` 60,000 × 10% p.a. × 3 years) = ` 42,000.
Perquisite = ` 42,000 – ` 30,000 = ` 12,000.
4. Computation of Taxable Salary of Mr. Balaji for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Basic salary [(` 50,000 × 7) + (` 60,000 × 5)] 6,50,000
Dearness Allowance (40% of basic salary) 2,60,000
Bonus (` 50,000 + 40% of ` 50,000) (See Note 1) 70,000
Employers contribution to recognised provident fund in
excess of 12% of salary = 4% of ` 6,50,000 (See Note 2) 26,000
Professional tax paid by employer 2,000
Perquisite of Motor Car (` 2,400 for 5 months) (See Note 4) 12,000
Gross Salary 10,20,000
Less: Deduction under section 16
Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) ` 50,000
Professional tax u/s 16(iii) (See Note 6) ` 2,500 52,500
Taxable Salary 9,67,500
Notes:
1. Since bonus was paid in the month of October, the basic salary of
` 50,000 for the month of October is considered for its calculation.
2. It is assumed that dearness allowance does not form part of salary for
computing retirement benefits.
3. As per Rule 3(7)(vii), facility of use of laptop and computer is a tax free
perquisite, whether used for official or personal purpose or both.
4. As per the provisions of Rule 3(2), in case a motor car (engine cubic
capacity exceeding 1.60 liters) owned by the employer is provided to
the employee without chauffeur for personal as well as office use, the
value of perquisite shall be ` 2,400 per month. The car was provided to
the employee from 01.11.2024, therefore the perquisite value has been
calculated for 5 months.
5. Mr. Balaji can avail exemption under section 10(5) on the entire amount
of ` 75,000 reimbursed by the employer towards Leave Travel
Concession since the same was availed for himself, his wife and three
children and the journey was undertaken by economy class airfare. The
restriction imposed for two children is not applicable in case of multiple
births which take place after the first child.
It is assumed that the Leave Travel Concession was availed for journey
within India.
He is eligible to claim benefit of exemption u/s 10(5) since he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
6. As per section 17(2)(iv), a “perquisite” includes any sum paid by the
employer in respect of any obligation which, but for such payment,
would have been payable by the assessee. Therefore, professional tax
of ` 2,000 paid by the employer is taxable as a perquisite in the hands
of Mr. Balaji. As per section 16(iii), a deduction from the salary is
provided on account of tax on employment i.e. professional tax paid
during the year.
Therefore, in the present case, the professional tax paid by the employer
on behalf of the employee ` 2,000 is first included in the salary and
deduction of the entire professional tax of ` 2,500 is provided from
salary.
5. Computation of taxable salary of Mr. X for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Basic pay [(` 20,000×9) + (` 21,000×3)] = ` 1,80,000 + 2,43,000
` 63,000
Dearness allowance [10% of basic pay] 24,300
Bonus 21,000
Employer’s contribution to Recognized Provident Fund in
excess of 12% (15%-12% =3% of ` 2,67,300) [See Note 1 8,019
below]
Taxable allowances
Telephone allowance 6,000
Taxable perquisites
Rent-free accommodation [See Note 1 & 2 below] 29,430
Medical reimbursement 25,000
Reimbursement of salary of housekeeper 12,000
Gift voucher [See Note 5 below] 10,000
Gross Salary 3,78,749
Less: Deduction under section 16(ia) – Standard deduction 50,000
Salary income chargeable to tax 3,28,749
Notes:
1. Since dearness allowance forms part of salary for retirement benefits,
the perquisite value of rent-free accommodation and employer’s
contribution to recognized provident fund have been accordingly
worked out.
2. Where the accommodation is taken on lease or rent by the employer,
the value of rent-free accommodation provided to employee would be
actual amount of lease rental paid or payable by the employer or 10%
of salary, whichever is lower.
For the purposes of valuation of rent free house, salary includes:
(i) Basic salary i.e., ` 2,43,000
(ii) Dearness allowance i.e. ` 24,300
(iii) Bonus i.e., ` 21,000
(iv) Telephone allowance i.e., ` 6,000
Therefore, salary works out to
` 2,43,000 + ` 24,300 + ` 21,000 + ` 6,000 = ` 2,94,300.
10% of salary = ` 2,94,300 × 10/100 = ` 29,430
Value of rent-free house = Lower of rent paid by the employer (i.e.
` 1,20,000) or 10% of salary (i.e., ` 29,430).
Therefore, the perquisite value is ` 44,145.
3. Facility of use of laptop is not a taxable perquisite.
4. Conveyance allowance is exempt since it is based on actual
reimbursement for official purposes.
5. The value of any gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by the
employee or by member of his household below ` 5,000 in aggregate
during the previous year is exempt. In this case, the gift voucher was
received on the occasion of marriage anniversary and the sum exceeds
the limit of ` 5,000.
Therefore, the entire amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite.
Note - An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of
` 5,000 is taxable. In such a case, the value of perquisite would be
` 5,000.
6. Premium of ` 5,000 paid by the company for personal accident policy
is not liable to tax.
6. Computation of income under the head “Salaries”
of Mr. Raja for the A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime
Particulars ` `
Basic Salary = ` 25,000 x 9 months 2,25,000
House Rent Allowance = ` 6,000 x 9 months 54,000
[Fully taxable under default tax regime]
Gratuity 3,50,000
Less: Least of the following exempt under section
10(10)(ii) 3,50,000 Nil
(i) Actual Gratuity received ` 3,50,000
(ii) 15 days salary for every year of completed
service [15/26 x ` 25,000 x 26] =` 3,75,000
(iii) Notified limit = ` 20,00,000
Leave encashment 3,15,000
Less: Least of the following exempt under section
10(10AA) 2,50,000 65,000
(i) ` 25,00,000
(ii) Leave salary actually received ` 3,15,000
(iii) ` 2,50,000, being 10 months’ salary x
` 25,000
(iv) Cash equivalent of leave standing at the credit
of the employee based on the average salary
of last 10 months’ (max. 30 days per year of
service) for every year of actual service
rendered for the employer from whose service
he has retired
375/30 x ` 25,000 = ` 3,12,500
[Leave Due = Leave allowed – Leave taken]
= 750 (30 days per year × 25 years) – 375 days
(15 days x 25)
= 375 days]
Uncommuted Pension received [` 5,000 x 1) + 9,000
(` 5,000 x 2 x 40%)
Commuted Pension received 3,00,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(10A)
1/3 x ` 3,00,000/60% x 100%) 1,66,667 1,33,333
Gift Voucher [As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any Nil
gift or voucher or token in lieu of gift received by
the employee or by member of his household not
exceeding ` 5,000 in aggregate during the
previous year is exempt]
Mobile Phone received as gift from colleagues Nil
(Neither taxable under the head “Salaries” nor
“Income from other sources”, since taxability
provisions under section 56(2)(x) are not attracted
in respect of mobile phone received from
colleagues, as mobile phone is not included in the
definition of “property” thereunder)
Gross Salary 4,86,333
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16 [Actual salary or 75,000
` 75,000, whichever is less] [Allowable under
default tax regime]
Net Salary 4,11,333
7. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Salaries”
of Ms. Akansha for A.Y.2025-26 under default tax regime
`
Particulars
Basic Salary 6,20,000
Dearness allowance 4,20,000
Commission 75,000
Entertainment allowance 9,000
Medical expenses reimbursed by the employer is fully taxable 18,000
Professional tax paid by the employer is a taxable perquisite 2,000
as per section 17(2)(iv), since it is an obligation of the
employee which is paid by the employer
Health insurance premium of ` 8,000 paid by the employer is Nil
an exempt perquisite [Clause (iii) of proviso to section 17(2)]
Gift voucher given by employer on Ms. Akansha birthday 10,000
(entire amount is taxable since the perquisite value exceeds
` 5,000) as per Rule 3(7)(iv)
Life insurance premium of Ms. Akansha paid by employer is 26,000
a taxable perquisite as per section 17(2)(v)
Laptop provided for use at home is an exempt perquisite as Nil
per Rule 3(7)(vii)
Provision of motor car with driver (engine cubic capacity
more than 1.6 litres) owned by employer to employee, the 39,600
perquisite value would be ` 39,600 [` (2,400+ 900) ×12] as
per Rule 3(2)
Annual credit card fees paid by employer is a taxable
perquisite as per Rule 3(7)(v) since the credit card is not
exclusively used for official purposes and details of usage are
7,000
not available
Gross Salary 12,26,600
Less: Deductions under section 16
- Standard Deduction as per section 16(ia) 75,000
Income chargeable under the head “Salaries” 11,51,600
Note: As per Rule 3(7)(iv), the value of any gift or voucher received by the
employee or by member of his household on ceremonial occasions or
otherwise from the employer shall be determined as the sum equal to the
amount of such gift. However, the value of any gift or voucher received by
the employee or by member of his household below ` 5,000 in aggregate
during the previous year would be exempt as per the proviso to Rule 3(7)(iv).
In this case, the gift voucher of ` 10,000 was received by
Ms. Akansha from her employer on the occasion of her birthday.
Since the value of the gift voucher exceeds the limit of ` 5,000, the entire
amount of ` 10,000 is liable to tax as perquisite. The above solution has
been worked out accordingly.
An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is taxable
in view of the language of Circular No.15/2001 dated 12.12.2001, which
states that such gifts upto ` 5,000 in the aggregate per annum would be
exempt, beyond which it would be taxed as a perquisite. As per this view,
the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000. Accordingly, the gross salary and
net salary would be ` 12,21,600 and ` 11,46,600, respectively.
UNIT – 3: PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS OR
PROFESSION
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to-
♦ comprehend the meaning of “business” and “profession” and the
scope of income chargeable to tax under this head;
♦ comprehend the meaning of speculative transaction and the tax
treatment of loss incurred in speculation business;
♦ identify the expenditures/payments which are admissible as
deduction, comprehend the conditions to be satisfied to avail such
deductions, the limits, if any, specified in respect thereof;
♦ compute the deductions available while computing business income
applying the relevant provisions under default tax regime under
section 115BAC;
♦ compute the deductions available while computing business income
applying the relevant provisions under normal provisions of the Act;
♦ identify the expenditures/payments which are not admissible as
deduction;
♦ identify the deductions allowable only on actual payment;
♦ examine when certain receipts are deemed to be income chargeable
to tax under this head;
♦ identify the assessees who are required to compulsorily maintain
books of account and get them audited;
♦ apply the presumptive tax provisions under the Act to compute
income from eligible business or profession;
♦ compute the business income by applying the charging and deeming
provisions and allowing permissible deductions;
♦ compute the business income in cases where income is partly
agricultural and partly business in nature.
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession" under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Particulars Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Net profit as per statement of profit and loss A
Add: Expenses debited to statement of profit and loss but
not allowable
• Depreciation as per books of account xxx
• Income-tax [disallowed u/s 40(a)(ii)] xxx
• 30% of sum payable to residents on which tax is not xxx
deducted at source or has not been remitted on or
before the due date u/s 139(1), after deduction,
disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) [The same is
allowable in the year in which the tax is deducted
and remitted]
• Any expenditure incurred, in respect of which xxx
payment is made for goods, services or facilities to a
related person, to the extent the same is excessive or
unreasonable, in the opinion of the A.O, having
regard to its FMV [disallowed u/s 40A(2)]
• Any expenditure incurred in respect of which payment xxx
or aggregate of payments to a person exceeding
` 10,000 in a single day is made otherwise than by
way of A/c payee cheque/bank draft/ use of ECS
through bank A/c or through such other prescribed
electronic mode (debit card, credit card, Net banking,
RTGS, NEFT, IMPS, BHIM Aadhar Pay) [disallowed u/s
40A(3)]
• Certain sums payable by the assessee which have not xxx
been paid during the relevant P.Y. in which the
liability was incurred on or before the due date for
filing return u/s 139(1) in respect of that P.Y.
[disallowed u/s 43B]
• Sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small xxx
enterprise beyond the time limit specified in section
15 of MSME Development Act, 2006
[disallowed u/s 43B]
• Personal expenses [not allowable as per section 37] xxx
• Capital expenditure [not allowable as per section 37] xxx
• Repairs of capital nature [not allowable as per xxx
Sections 30 & 31]
• Amortization of preliminary expenditure u/s 35D/ xxx
expenditure incurred under voluntary retirement
scheme u/s 35DDA [4/5th of such expenditure to be
added back]
• Family planning expenses not allowable in the case xxx
of a person other than a company
• Fine or penalty paid for infringement or breach of xxx
law [However, penalty in the nature of damages for
delay in completion of a contract, being
compensatory in nature, is allowable]
• All expenses related to income which is not taxable xxx
under this head e.g. municipal taxes in respect of
residential house property
• Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way
of contribution to pension scheme u/s 80CCD
exceeding 14% of the salary of the employee xxx B
(A + B) C
Less: Expenditure allowable as deduction but not debited
to statement of profit and loss
• Depreciation computed as per Rule 5 of Income-tax xxx
Rules, 1962
• 30% of expenditure disallowed in an earlier P.Y. due xxx
to non-deduction of tax at source/ non-remittance
before due date u/s 139(1) of that year, allowed this
year on remittance (This item of adjustment is
generally given under “Additional information” in the
question)
• Amount disallowed in an earlier P.Y. as per section
43B, due to non-payment on or before due date u/s
139(1), allowed as deduction in this year on actual
payment (This item of adjustment is generally given xxx D
under “Additional information” in the question)
(C - D) E
Less: Income credited in statement of profit and loss
but not taxable/taxable under any other head
• Dividend income xxx
• Agricultural income exempt under section 10(1) xxx
• Interest on securities/savings bank account/FD xxx
taxable under the head “Income from other sources”
• Profit on sale of capital asset taxable under the head xxx
“Capital Gains”
• Rent from house property taxable under the head xxx
“Income from house property”
• Winnings from lotteries, horse races, games etc. xxx
taxable under the head “Income from other sources”
• Gifts exempt or taxable under the head “Income xxx
from other sources”
• Income-tax refund not taxable xxx
• Interest on income-tax refund taxable under the
head “Income from other sources” xxx F
(E - F) G
Add: Income chargeable under this head/Deemed Income
[If the same is given as additional information and has
not already been credited to Statement of Profit &
Loss]
• Salary, remuneration, interest received by a partner xxx
from the firm, to the extent the same is deductible in
the hands of the firm as per section 40(b)
• Bad debt allowed as deduction u/s 36(1)(vii) in an xxx
earlier P.Y., now recovered [deemed as income u/s
41(4)]
• Remission or cessation of a trading liability [deemed
as income u/s 41(1)] xxx H
Profits and gains from business or profession (G + H) I
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” under optional tax regime taking business income
computed under default tax regime under section 115BAC as the starting point
Particulars Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Profits and gains from business or profession as per section A
115BAC
Less: Expenditure allowable as deduction
• Additional depreciation@20% of actual cost of new xxx
P & M acquired by an assessee engaged in the
business of manufacture or production of any article
or thing or generation, transmission or distribution of
power (10% of actual cost, if put to use for less than
180 days in the year of acquisition) [Balance additional
depreciation can be claimed in the next year i.e.,
P.Y.2025-26]
• Balance additional depreciation @10% of actual cost
of P & M acquired and installed during the
P.Y. 2023-24 and put to use for less than 180 days in xxx
B
that year
Profits and gains from business or profession as per normal C
provisions of the Act (A – B)
Note - An assessee carrying on specified business and exercising the option to
shift out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), is eligible
for deduction u/s 35AD in respect of capital expenditure (other than land,
goodwill and financial instruments) incurred for such business, subject to
fulfillment of specified conditions. However, if he pays tax under default tax
regime under section 115BAC, he would not be eligible for deduction u/s 35AD.
The table in the next page depicts the allowability of deduction for expenditure
incurred for in-house scientific research related to the business of the assessee
and contribution to outsiders for scientific research/social science/statistical
research under the default tax regime and optional tax regime.
ssenisub
ot
detaler
hcraeser
cifitneics
esuoh-ni
rof
derrucni
erutidnepxe
rof
noitcudeD
hcraeser
lacitsitats/ecneics
laicos/hcraeser
cifitneics
rof
sredistuo
ot
noitubirtnoc
eht
rep
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
eht
rednU
CAB511
s/u
emiger
xat
tluafed
eht
rednU
tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
gnitupmoc
elihw
tnemtaerT
ytilibawollA
gnitupmoc
elihw
tnemtaerT
ytilibawollA
/erutidnepxE
fo
erutaN
daeh
eht
rednu
emocni
fo
daeh
eht
rednu
emocni
noitcuded
fo
cifitneics
rof
noitubirtnoc
”PBGP“
noitcuded
”PBGP“
/ecneics
laicos/hcraeser
hcraeser
lacitsitats
sa
nevig
fI
ot
detibed
fI
sa
nevig
fI
ot
detibed
fI
lanoitidda
ssoL
&
tiforP
lanoitidda
ssoL
&
tiforP
noitamrofni
c/A
noitamrofni
c/A
ssenisub
s’eessessa
ot
detaler
hcraeser
cifitneics
no
erutidnepxe
hcraeser
esuoh
nI
.I
detcuded
eb
oT
tnemtsujda
oN
sa
elbawollA
eb
oT
tnemtsujda
oN
sa
elbawollA
euneveR
)i()1(53
gnitupmoc
elihw
ecnis
,deriuqer
noitcuded
detcuded
ecnis
,deriuqer
noitcuded
erutidnepxe
rednu
emocni
ydaerla
si
ti
elihw
ydaerla
si
ti
”PBGP“
daeh
eht
ot
detibed
gnitupmoc
ot
detibed
latipac
ynA
.s.w.r
)vi()1(53
ssol
dna
tiforp
rednu
emocni
ssol
dna
tiforp
rehto(
erutidnepxe
)2(53
c/A
daeh
eht
c/A
fo
tsoc
naht
”PBGP“
fo
noitisiuqca
)dnal
3.1 90 INCOME TAX LAW
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
eht
rednU
CAB511
s/u
emiger
xat
tluafed
eht
rednU
tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
elihw
tnemtaerT
ytilibawollA
gnitupmoc
elihw
tnemtaerT
ytilibawollA
noitubirtnoc
/erutidnepxE
fo
erutaN
rednu
emocni
gnitupmoc
noitcuded
fo
”PBGP“
daeh
eht
rednu
emocni
noitcuded
fo
/ecneics
laicos/hcraeser
cifitneics
rof
”PBGP“
daeh
eht
hcraeser
lacitsitats
sa
nevig
fI
ot detibed
fI
sa
nevig
fI
ot
detibed
fI
lanoitidda
&
tiforP
lanoitidda
ssoL
&
tiforP
noitamrofni
c/A
ssoL
noitamrofni
c/A
sredistuo
ot
noitubirtnoC
.II
eb
oT
oN
sa
elbawollA
tnemtsujda
oN
dedda
eb
oT
elbawolla
toN
hcraeser
devorppa
deifitoN
)ii()1(53
detcuded
tnemtsujda
noitcuded
deriuqer
elihw
kcab
noitcuded
sa
/ytisrevinu/noitaicossa
elihw
,deriuqer
gnitupmoc
rof
noitutitsni
rehto/egelloc
gnitupmoc
si
ti
ecnis
rednu
emocni
hcraeser
cifitneics
emocni
ydaerla
daeh
eht
ynapmoC
deifiton
devorppA
)aii()1(53
eht
rednu
ot
detibed
”PBGP“
hcraeser
cifitneics
rof
”PBGP“
daeh
dna
tiforp
hcraeser
devorppa
deifitoN
)iii()1(53
c/A
ssol
/ytisrevinu/noitaicossa
rof
noitutitsni
rehto/egelloc
ro
ecneics
laicos
ni
hcraeser
hcraeser
lacitsitats
lanoitaN
devorppA
)AA2(53
/ytisrevinU
/yrotarobaL
eb
ot
nosrep
deificeps/TII
hcraeser
cifitneics
rof
desu
na
rednu
nekatrednu
emmargorp
devorppa
PROFITS & GAINS OF BUSINESS OR PROFESSION 3.1 91
3.1 MEANING OF ‘BUSINESS’ AND ‘PROFESSION’
The tax payable by an assessee on his income under this head is in respect of the
profits and gains of any business or profession, carried on by him or on his
behalf during the previous year.
Business Profession
The term “business” has been The term “profession” has not been
defined in section 2(13) to “include defined in the Act. It means an
any trade, commerce or manufacture occupation requiring some degree of
or any adventure or concern in the learning. The term ‘profession’
nature of trade, commerce or includes vocation as well [Section
manufacture”. 2(36)].
• A painter, a sculptor, an author, an auditor, a lawyer, a doctor, an
architect and even an astrologer are persons who can be said to be
carrying on a profession but not business.
• It is, however, not material whether a person is carrying on a ‘business’ or
‘profession’ or ‘vocation’ since for purposes of assessment, profits from all these
sources are treated and taxed alike (except in case of tax audit and presumptive
income provisions, where the rates and threshold limits are different for business
and profession).
• Business necessarily means a continuous exercise of an activity with a profit
motive; nevertheless, profit from a single venture in the nature of trade may also
be treated as business.
Meaning of ‘Profits’
(i) Profits in cash or in kind: Profits may be realised in money or in money’s
worth, i.e., in cash or in kind. Where profit is realised in any form other than
cash, the cash equivalent of the receipt on the date of receipt must be taken
as the value of the income received in kind.
(ii) Capital receipts: Capital receipts are not generally to be taken into account
while computing profits under this head.
(iii) Voluntary receipts: Payment voluntarily made by persons who were under
no obligation to pay anything at all would be income in the hands of the
recipient, if they were received in the course of a business or by the exercise
of a profession or vocation. Thus, any amount paid to a lawyer by a person
who was not a client, but who has been benefited by the lawyer’s
professional service to another would be assessable as the lawyer’s income.
(iv) Application of the gains of trade is immaterial: Gains made even for the
benefit of the community by a public body would be liable to tax. To attract
the provisions of section 28, it is necessary that the business, profession or
vocation should be carried on at least for some time during the accounting
year but not necessarily throughout that year and not necessarily by the
assessee-owner personally, but it should be under his direction and control.
(v) Income from distinct businesses: The profits of each distinct business
must be computed separately but the tax chargeable under this section is
not on the separate income of every distinct business but on the aggregate
profits of all the businesses carried on by the assessee.
(vi) Computation of profits: Profits should be computed after deducting the
losses and expenses incurred for earning the income in the regular course
of the business, profession, or vocation unless the loss or expenses is
expressly or by necessary implication, disallowed by the Act. The charge is
not on the gross receipts but on the profits and gains.
(vii) Legality of income: The illegality of a business, profession or vocation does
not exempt its profits from tax. The revenue is not concerned with the taint
of illegality in the income or its source. Thus, income tax is not restricted in
its application to lawful business only.
However, expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is an
offence or which is prohibited by law would not be allowable as deduction
while computing profits of such business.
3.2 METHOD OF ACCOUNTING
Under section 145(1), income chargeable under the heads “Profits and gains of
business or profession” or “Income from other sources” shall be computed in
accordance with either the cash or mercantile system of accounting regularly
employed by the assessee.
However, as per section 145B, certain income would be taxable in the following
manner:
(i) interest received by an assessee on compensation or on enhanced
compensation, shall be deemed to be the income of the year in which it is
received [Such income is taxable under the head “Income from other sources”]
(ii) income referred to in section 2(24)(xviii) i.e., assistance in the form of a subsidy
or grant or cash incentive or duty drawback or waiver or concession or
reimbursement, by whatever name called, by the Central Government or a
State Government or any authority or body or agency in cash or kind to the
assessee shall be deemed to be the income of the previous year in which it is
received, if not charged to income tax for any earlier previous year.
Under section 145(2), the Central Government is empowered to notify in the
Official Gazette from time to time, income computation and disclosure standards
(ICDSs) to be followed by any class of assessees or in respect of any class of
income.
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. S.O.3079(E) dated
29.9.2016, notified ten ICDSs to be applicable from A.Y.2017-18.
The notified ICDSs have to be followed by all assessees (other than an individual
or a Hindu undivided family who is not required to get his accounts of the
previous year audited in accordance with the provisions of section 44AB)
following the mercantile system of accounting, for the purposes of computation
of income chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” or “Income from other sources”.
The ten notified ICDSs are:
ICDS I : Accounting Policies
ICDS II : Valuation of Inventories
ICDS III : Construction Contracts
ICDS IV : Revenue Recognition
ICDS V : Tangible Fixed Assets
ICDS VI : The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
ICDS VII : Government Grants
ICDS VIII : Securities
ICDS IX : Borrowing Costs
ICDS X : Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets
Note: ICDSs would be dealt with in detail at Final Level.
3.3 INCOME CHARGEABLE UNDER THIS HEAD
[SECTION 28]
The various items of income chargeable to tax as income under the head ‘profits
and gains of business or profession’ are as under:
(i) Income from business or profession: Income arising to any person by way
of profits and gains from the business or profession carried on by him at
any time during the previous year.
If an assessee is engaged in the business of letting out of residential houses,
the income generated from letting out of a residential house or a part of the
house by the owner shall not be chargeable under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession” and would be chargeable under the head “Income
from house property”.
(ii) Any compensation or other payment due to or received by:
(a) any person, by whatever name called, managing the whole or
substantially the whole of -
(i) the affairs of an Indian company or
(ii) the affairs in India of any other company
at or in connection with the termination of his management or office
or the modification of any of the terms and conditions relating
thereto;
(b) any person, by whatever name called, holding an agency in India for
any part of the activities relating to the business of any other person,
at or in connection with the termination of the agency or the
modification of any of the terms and conditions relating thereto;
(c) any person, for or in connection with the vesting in the Government or
in any corporation owned or controlled by the Government under any
law for the time being in force, of the management of any property or
business;
(d) any person, by whatever name called, at or in connection with the
termination or modification of the terms and conditions, of any
contract relating to his business.
(iii) Income from specific services performed for its members by a trade,
professional or business: Income derived by any trade, professional or
similar associations from specific services rendered by them to their
members. It may be noted that this forms an exception to the general
principle governing the assessment of income of mutual associations such
as chambers of commerce, stock brokers’ associations etc.
As a result, a trade, professional or similar association performing specific
services for its members is to be deemed as carrying on business in respect
of these services and on that assumption the income arising therefrom is to
be subjected to tax. For this purpose, it is not necessary that the income
received by the association should definitely or directly be related to these
services.
(iv) Incentives received or receivable by assessee carrying on export
business:
(a) Profit on sale of import entitlements: Profits on sale of a licence
granted under the Imports (Control) Order, 19551 made under the
Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 19472.
(b) Cash assistance against exports under any scheme of GoI: Cash
assistance (by whatever name called) received or receivable by any
person against exports under any scheme of the Government of India.
(c) Customs duty or excise re-paid or repayable as drawback: Any
Customs duty or Excise duty drawback repaid or repayable to any
person against export under the Customs and Central Excise Duties
Drawback Rules, 19713.
(d) Profit on transfer of Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme or Duty
Free Replenishment Certificate: Any profit on the transfer of the
Duty Entitlement Pass Book Scheme4 or Duty Free Replenishment
Certificate, being Duty Remission Scheme, under the export and
1 Now Foreign Trade (Exemption from application of Rules in certain cases) Order, 1993
2 Now Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992
3 Now Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 2017
4 The pre-export DEPB scheme was abolished with effect from 1 April 2000. After several extensions
through the years, the post-export scheme was phased out on 30 September 2011 and thereafter
DEPB items were incorporated into the Duty Drawback Schedule with effect from 1 October 2011
import policy formulated and announced under section 5 of the
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992.
(v) Value of any benefit or perquisite: The value of any benefit or perquisite
arising from business or the exercise of any profession, whether –
- convertible into money or not or
- in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind.
Example:
If a company provides rent free residential accommodation to a lawyer in
consideration of professional services rendered by him to the company, the
value of such accommodation would be assessable in the hands of the said
lawyer as his income under the head “Profits and gains or business or
profession”.
(vi) Sum due to, or received by, a partner of a firm: Any interest, salary,
bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever name called, due to or
received by a partner of a firm from such firm will be deemed to be income
from business. However, where any interest, salary, bonus, commission or
remuneration by whatever name called, or any part thereof has not been
allowed to be deducted under section 40(b), in the computation of the
income of the firm the income to be taxed shall be adjusted to the extent of
the amount disallowed.
Example:
A firm pays interest to a partner at 20% simple interest p.a. The allowable
rate of interest is 12% p.a. Hence, the excess 8% paid will be disallowed in the
hands of the firm. Since the excess interest has suffered tax in the hands of
the firm, the same will not be taxed in the hands of the partner.
Exemption of share income of a partner [Section 10(2A)]
Section 10(2A) exempts from tax a partner’s share in the total income of the
firm. In other words, the partner’s share in the total income of the firm
determined in accordance with the profit-sharing ratio will be exempt from tax.
(vii) Any sum whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, under an
agreement:
(a) for not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or profession; or
However, the following sums received or receivable would not be
chargeable to tax under the head “profits and gains from business
or profession”:
(i) any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on
account of transfer of the right to manufacture, produce or
process any article or thing or right to carry on any business or
profession, which is chargeable under the head “Capital gains”.
(ii) any sum received as compensation, from the multilateral fund of
the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone
layer under the United Nations Environment Programme, in
accordance with the terms of agreement entered into with the
Government of India.
(b) for not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trade mark, licence,
franchise or any other business or commercial right of similar nature
or information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture or
processing of goods or provision for services.
(viii) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy: Any sum received
by the assessee, as an employer, under a Keyman insurance policy including
the sum allocated by way of bonus on such policy will be taxable as income
from business.
(ix) Fair market value of inventory on its conversion/treatment as capital
asset: Fair market value of inventory on the date of its conversion or
treatment as capital asset, determined in the prescribed manner, would be
chargeable to tax as business income.
(x) Sum received on account of capital asset referred under section 35AD:
Any sum received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of any capital
asset (in respect of which whole of the expenditure on such capital asset has
been allowed as a deduction under section 35AD) being demolished,
destroyed, discarded or transferred.
3.4 SPECULATION BUSINESS
Explanation 2 to section 28 specifically provides that where an assessee carries on
speculation business, that business of the assessee must be deemed as distinct
and separate from any other business. This becomes necessary because
section 73 provides that losses in speculation business unlike other business
cannot be set-off against the profits of any business other than a speculation
business.
Likewise, a loss in speculation business carried forward to a subsequent year can
be set-off only against the profit and gains of any speculation business in the
subsequent year. Profits and losses resulting from speculative transaction must,
therefore, be treated as separate and distinct from profits and gains of business
and profession from any other business.
Meaning of Speculative Transaction
“Speculative transaction” means a transaction in which a contract for the
purchase or sales of any commodity including stocks and shares is periodically or
ultimately settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of the
commodity or scrips [Section 43(5)].
Where any part of the business of a company consists in the purchase and sale of
the shares of other companies, such a company shall be deemed to be carrying
on speculation business to the extent to which the business consists of the
purchase and sale of such shares.
However, this deeming provision does not apply to the following companies –
(1) A company whose gross total income consists of mainly income chargeable
under the heads “Interest on securities”, “Income from house property”,
“Capital gains” and “Income from other sources”;
(2) A company, the principal business of which is –
(i) the business of trading in shares; or
(ii) the business of banking; or
(iii) the granting of loans and advances.
Accordingly, if these companies carry on the business of purchase and sale of
shares of other companies, they would not be deemed to be carrying on
speculation business. [Explanation to section 73]
Transactions not deemed to be speculative transactions
The following forms of transactions shall not be deemed to be speculative
transaction:
(i) Hedging contract in respect of raw materials or merchandise: A contract in
respect of raw materials or merchandise entered into by a person in the course
of his manufacturing or merchandising business to guard against loss through
future price fluctuations in respect of his contracts for the actual delivery of
goods manufactured by him or merchandise sold by him; or
(ii) Hedging contract in respect of stocks and shares: A contract in respect of
stocks and shares entered into by a dealer or investor therein to guard against
loss in his holdings of stocks and shares through price fluctuation; or
(iii) Forward contract: A contract entered into by a member of a forward
market or stock exchange in the course of any transaction in the nature of
jobbing or arbitrage to guard against any loss which may arise in the
ordinary course of his business as a member; or
(iv) Trading in derivatives: An eligible transaction (transaction carried out
electronically through SEBI registered stockbroker or sub broker or
intermediary) carried out in respect of trading in derivatives in a recognized
stock exchange.
(v) Trading in commodity derivatives: An eligible transaction (transaction
carried out electronically through a member or intermediary registered
under the bye-laws, rules and regulations of the recognized stock exchange)
in respect of trading in commodity derivatives carried out in a recognised
stock exchange, which is chargeable to commodities transaction tax under
Chapter VII of the Finance Act, 2013.
However, the requirement of chargeability of commodities transaction tax is
not applicable in respect of trading in agricultural commodity derivatives.
3.5 COMPUTATION OF PROFITS AND GAINS
FROM BUSINESS OR PROFESSION
[SECTION 29]
According to section 29, the profits and gains of any business or profession are to
be computed in accordance with the provisions contained in sections 30 to 43D. It
must, however, be remembered that in addition to the specific allowances and
deductions stated in sections 30 to 36, the Act further permits allowance of items
of expenses under the residuary section 37(1), which extends the allowance to
items of business expenditure not covered by sections 30 to 36, where these are
allowable according to accepted commercial practices.
Computation of profits and gains from
business or profession [Section 29]
Expenses or
Admissible payments not Profits
Inadmissible
deductions deductible in chargeable to Other
deductions
[Sections 30 to certain tax provisions
[Section 40] circumstances
37] [Section 41]
[Section 40A]
3.6 ADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTIONS 30
TO 37]
(i) Rent, rates, taxes, repairs and insurance for buildings [Section 30]
Section 30 allows deduction in respect of the rent, rates, taxes, repairs and
insurance of buildings used by the assessee for the purposes of his business or
profession.
• Where the premises are occupied by the assessee as a tenant, the rent
paid for such premises and the amount paid on account of cost of repairs, if
the assessee has undertaken to bear such repairs to the premises.
• Occupation of premises by the assessee being the owner: Where the
assessee himself is owner of the premises and occupies them for his
business purposes, no notional rent would be allowed under this section.
However, where a firm runs its business in the premises owned by one of its
partners, the rent payable to the partner will be an allowable deduction to
the extent it is reasonable and is not excessive.
• Repairs of the premises: Apart from rent, this section allows deductions in
respect of expenses incurred on account of repairs to building in case where
♦ the assessee is the owner of the building or
♦ the assessee is a tenant who has undertaken to bear the cost of
repairs to the premises.
♦ Even if the assessee occupies the premises otherwise than as a tenant
or owner, i.e., as a lessee, licensee or mortgagee with possession, he is
entitled to a deduction under the section in respect of current repairs
to the premises.
• Cost of repairs and current repairs of capital nature not to be allowed
as deduction [Explanation to section 30]: Amount paid on account of the
cost of repairs to the premises occupied by the assessee as a tenant and the
amount paid on account of current repairs to the premises occupied by the
assessee, otherwise than as a tenant, shall not include any capital nature
expenditure. In other words, cost of repairs and current repairs other than of
capital nature is allowed as deduction while computing business income.
• Other expenses: In addition, deductions are allowed in respect of expenses
by way of land revenue, local rates, municipal taxes and insurance in respect
of the premises used for the purposes of the business or profession. Cesses,
rates and taxes levied by a foreign Government are also allowed.
• Premises used partly for business and partly for other purposes: Where
the premises are used partly for business and partly for other purposes, only
a proportionate part of the expenses attributable to that part of the
premises used for purposes of business will be allowed as a deduction
[Section 38(1)].
(ii) Repairs and insurance of machinery, plant and furniture [Section 31]
Section 31 allows deduction in respect of the expenses on current repairs and
insurance of machinery, plant and furniture in computing the income from
business or profession.
• Usage of the asset for business: In order to claim this deduction, the
assets must have been used for purposes of the assessee’s own business,
the profits of which are being taxed.
The word ‘used’ has to be read in a wide sense so as to include
active as well as passive use. However, insurance and repair charges
of assets which are owned by the assessee but have not been used
for the business during the previous year would not be allowed as a deduction.
Even if an asset is used for a part of the previous year, the assessee is entitled
to the deduction of the full amount of expenses on repair and insurance
charges and not merely an amount proportionate to the period of use.
• Repairs exclude replacement or reconstruction: The term ‘repairs’ will
include renewal or renovation of an asset but not its replacement or
reconstruction.
The deduction allowable under this section is only of current
repairs but not arrears of repairs for earlier years even though
they may still rank for a deduction under section 37(1).
• Insurance premium: The deduction allowable in respect of premia paid for
insuring the machinery, plant or furniture is subject to the following
conditions:
 The insurance must be against the risk of damage or destruction of
the machinery, plant or furniture.
 The assets must be used by the assessee for the purposes of his
business or profession during the accounting year.
 The premium should have been actually paid (or payable under the
mercantile system of accounting).
The premium may even take the form of contribution to a trade association
which undertakes to indemnify and insure its members against loss; such
premium or contribution would be deductible as an allowance under this
section even if a part of it is returnable to the insured in certain
circumstances.
It does not matter if the payment of the claim will endure to the benefit of
someone other than the owner.
• Current repairs of capital nature not to be allowed [Explanation to
section 31]: Amount paid on account of current repairs of machinery, plant
or furniture shall not include any capital nature expenditure. In other words,
current repairs other than of capital nature expenditure is allowed as
deduction in the computation of income under the head “profits and gains
of business or profession”.
(iii) Depreciation [Section 32]
(1) Charge of depreciation mandatory: Section 32 allows a deduction in
respect of depreciation resulting from the diminution or exhaustion in the
value of certain capital assets.
Explanation 5 to this section provides that deduction on account of
depreciation shall be made compulsorily, whether or not the assessee has
claimed the deduction in computing his total income.
(2) Conditions to be satisfied for allowance of depreciation: The allowance of
depreciation which is regulated by Rule 5 of the Income-tax Rules, 1962, is
subject to the following conditions which are cumulative in their application.
(a) The assets in respect of which depreciation is claimed must
belong to either of the following categories, namely -
(i) buildings, machinery, plant or furniture, being tangible assets;
(ii) know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises
or any other business or commercial rights of similar nature,
being intangible assets acquired on or after 1st April, 1998, not
being goodwill of a business or profession.
 The depreciation in the value of any other capital assets
cannot be claimed as a deduction from the business
income.
 No depreciation is allowable on the cost of the land on
which the building is erected because the term ‘building’
refers only to superstructure but not the land on which it
has been erected.
 The term ‘plant’ as defined in section 43(3) includes ships,
books, vehicles, scientific apparatus and surgical
equipment used for the purposes of the business or
profession but does not include tea bushes or livestock or
buildings or furniture and fittings.
 The word ‘plant’ does not include an animal, human body
or stock-in-trade. Thus, plant includes all goods and
chattels, fixed or movable, which a businessman keeps for
employment in his business with some degree of
durability.
 The expression ‘plant’ includes part of a plant (e.g., the
engine of a vehicle); machinery includes part of machinery
and building includes a part of the building.
 Similarly, the term ‘buildings’ includes within its scope roads,
bridges, culverts, wells and tubewells.
(b) The assets should be actually used by the assessee for purposes of
his business during the previous year - The asset must be put to use at
any time during the previous year. The amount of depreciation allowance
is not proportionate to the period of use during the previous year.
Asset used for less than 180 days - It has been provided that where
any asset is acquired by the assessee during the previous year and is
put to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of
less than 180 days, depreciation shall be allowed at 50% of the
allowable depreciation according to the percentage prescribed in
respect of the block of assets comprising such asset. It is significant to
note that this restriction applies only to the year of acquisition and
not for subsequent years.
If the assets are not used exclusively for the business or
profession of the assessee but for other purposes as well, the
depreciation allowable would be a proportionate part of the
depreciation allowance to which the assessee would be otherwise entitled.
This is provided in section 38.
Depreciation would be allowable to the owner even in respect of
assets which are actually utilized by another person e.g., a lessee or
licensee. The deduction on account of depreciation would be allowed
under this section to the owner who has let on hire his building,
machinery, plant or furniture provided that letting out of such assets is
the business of the assessee. In other cases where the letting out of
such assets does not constitute the business of the assessee, the
deduction on account of depreciation would still be allowable under
section 57(ii).
Use includes passive use in certain circumstances: One of the
conditions for claim of depreciation is that the asset must be “used for
the purpose of business or profession”. Courts have held that, in
certain circumstances, an asset can be said to be in use even when it is
“kept ready for use”.
For example, stand by equipment and fire extinguishers can be
capitalized if they are ‘ready for use’’.
Likewise, machinery spares which can be used only in connection with
an item of tangible fixed asset and their use is expected to be
irregular, has to be capitalised. Hence, in such cases, the term “use”
embraces both active use and passive use. However, such passive use
should also be for business purposes.
(c) The assessee must own the assets, wholly or partly - In the case of
buildings, the assessee must own the superstructure and not
necessarily the land on which the building is constructed. In such
cases, the assessee should be a lessee of the land on which the
building stands and the lease deed must provide that the building will
belong to the lessor of the land upon the expiry of the period of lease.
Thus, no depreciation will be allowed to an assessee in respect of an
asset which he does not own but only uses or hires for purposes of his
business.
In this connection, students may note that Explanation 1 to
section 32 provides that where the business or profession of
the assessee is carried on in a building not owned by him
but in respect of which the assessee holds a lease or other right of
occupancy, and any capital expenditure is incurred by the assessee for
the purposes of the business or profession or the construction of any
structure or doing of any work by way of renovation, extension or
improvement to the building, then depreciation will be allowed as if the
said structure or work is a building owned by the assessee.
Depreciation is allowable not only in respect of assets “wholly” owned
by the assessee but also in respect of assets “partly” owned by him
and used for the purposes of his business or profession.
(3) Computation of Depreciation Allowance - Depreciation allowance will be
calculated on the following basis:
(i) Power generation undertakings: In the case of assets of an
undertaking engaged in generation or generation and distribution of
power, such percentage on the actual cost to the assessee as
prescribed by Rule 5(1A).
Rule 5(1A) - As per this rule, the depreciation on the abovementioned
assets shall be calculated at the percentage of the actual cost at rates
specified in Appendix IA of these rules. However, the aggregate
depreciation allowed in respect of any asset for different assessment
years shall not exceed the actual cost of the asset. It is further provided
that such an undertaking as mentioned above has the option of being
allowed depreciation on the written down value of such block of assets
as are used for its business at rates specified in Appendix I to these rules.
However, such option must be exercised before the due date for
furnishing return under section 139(1) for the assessment year
relevant to the previous year in which it begins to generate power. It is
further provided that any such option once exercised shall be final and
shall apply to all subsequent assessment years.
(ii) Block of assets: In the case of any block of assets, at such percentage of
the written down value of the block, as may be prescribed by Rule 5(1).
Block of Assets: A “block of assets” is defined in section 2(11), as a
group of assets falling within a class of assets comprising -
(a) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or furniture;
(b) intangible assets, being know-how, patents, copyrights,
trademarks, licenses, franchises or any other business or
commercial rights of similar nature, not being goodwill of a
business or profession, in respect of which the same percentage
of depreciation is prescribed.
Know-how - In this context, ‘know-how’ means any industrial
information or technique likely to assist in the manufacture or
processing of goods or in the working of a mine, oil-well or other
sources of mineral deposits (including searching for discovery or
testing of deposits for the winning of access thereto).
(iii) Additional depreciation on Plant or Machinery acquired: In case of
an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and paying tax as per the
optional tax regime under the regular provisions of the Act, additional
depreciation is allowed on any new machinery or plant (other than
ships and aircraft) acquired and installed by an assessee engaged in
the business of manufacture or production of any article or thing or in
the business of generation, transmission or distribution of power at
the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.
Asset put to use for less than 180 days: Additional depreciation
@10% (i.e., 50% of additional depreciation of 20%) to be allowed,
where the plant or machinery is put to use for less than 180 days
during the previous year in which such asset is acquired.
Further, the balance additional depreciation@10% (i.e., remaining 50% of
the additional depreciation of 20%) on new plant or machinery acquired
and used for less than 180 days, which has not been allowed in the year
of acquisition and installation of such plant or machinery, shall be
allowed in the immediately succeeding previous year if the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided u/s
115BAC(1A) in the immediately succeeding previous year.
Plant and Machinery not qualifying for additional depreciation
Such additional depreciation will not be available in respect of:
(i) any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the
assessee, was used within or outside India by any other person; or
(ii) any machinery or plant installed in office premises, residential
accommodation, or in any guest house; or
(iii) office appliances or road transport vehicles; or
(iv) any machinery or plant, the whole or part of the actual cost of
which is allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation
or otherwise) in computing the income chargeable under the
head “Profits and Gains of Business or Profession” of any one
previous year.
Eligibility for grant of additional depreciation under section
32(1)(iia) in the case of an assessee engaged in printing or
printing and publishing [Circular No. 15/2016, dated 19-5-2016]
An assessee, engaged in the business of manufacture or production of
an article or thing, is eligible to claim additional depreciation under
section 32(1)(iia) in addition to the normal depreciation under section
32(1).
The CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that the business of printing
or printing and publishing amounts to manufacture or production of
an article or thing and is, therefore, eligible for additional depreciation
under section 32(1)(iia).
Additional depreciation would be allowed to an assessee only
if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable
when the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax
regime u/s 115BAC.
(iv) Terminal depreciation: In case of a power concern as covered under
clause (i) above, if any asset is sold, discarded, demolished or
otherwise destroyed in the previous year (other than the previous year
in which it is first brought into use) the depreciation amount will be
the amount by which the moneys payable in respect of such building,
machinery, plant or furniture, together with the amount of scrap value,
if any, falls short of the written down value thereof. The depreciation
will be available only if the deficiency is actually written off in the
books of the assessee.
Meaning of certain term
Term Meaning
Moneys In respect of any building, machinery, plant or furniture
payable includes —
(a) any insurance, salvage or compensation moneys
payable in respect thereof;
(b) where the building, machinery, plant or furniture is
sold, the price for which it is sold.
(4) Rates of depreciation – All assets have been divided into four main categories
and rates of depreciation as prescribed by Rule 5(1) are given below:
PART A TANGIBLE ASSETS
I Buildings
Block 1. Buildings which are used mainly for residential 5%
purposes except hotels and boarding houses
Block 2. Buildings which are not used mainly for residential purposes 10%
and not covered by Block (1) above and (3) below
Block 3. Buildings acquired on or after 1st September, 2002 for 40%
installing machinery and plant forming part of water
supply project or water treatment system and which is
put to use for the purpose of business of providing
infrastructure facilities
Block 4. Purely temporary erections such as wooden structures 40%
II Furniture and Fittings
Block 1. Furniture and fittings including electrical fittings 10%
[“Electrical fittings” include electrical wiring, switches,
sockets, other fittings and fans, etc.]
III Plant & Machinery
Block 1. Motor cars other than those used in a business of 30%
running them on hire, acquired during the period from
23.8.2019 to 31.03.2020 and put to use on or before
31.03.2020
Block 2. Motor cars other than those used in a business of running 15%
them on hire, acquired or put to use on or after 1-4-1990
[Other than motor cars mentioned in Block 1 above]
Block 3. Motors buses, motor lorries, motor taxis used in a 45%
business of running them on hire, acquired during the
period from 23.8.2019 to 31.03.2020 and put to use on or
before 31.03.2020
Block 4. Motors buses, motor lorries, motor taxis used in the 30%
business of running them on hire [Other than mentioned
in Block 3 above]
Block 5. Moulds used in rubber and plastic goods factories 30%
Block 6. Aeroplanes, Aeroengines 40%
Block 7. Specified air pollution control equipments, water 40%
pollution control equipments, solid waste control
equipment and solid waste recycling and resource
recovery systems
Block 8. Plant & Machinery used in semi-conductor industry 30%
covering all Integrated Circuits (ICs) (other than
mentioned in Block 7 Above)
Block 9. Life-saving medical equipment 40%
Block 10. Machinery and plant, acquired and installed on or after 40%
the 1st September, 2002 in a water supply project or a
water treatment system and which is put to use for the
purpose of business of providing infrastructure facility
Block 11. Containers made of glass or plastic used as re-fills 40%
Block 12 Energy Saving Devices (as specified) 40%
Block 13. Renewable Energy Saving Devices (as specified) 40%
including the devices specified in (i) to (iii) below
(i) Electrically operated vehicles including battery 40%
powered or fuel-cell powered vehicles
(ii) Windmills and any specially designed devices which 40%
run on windmills installed on or after 1.4.2014
(iii) Any special devices including electric generators and 40%
pumps running on wind energy installed on or after
1.4.2014
Block 14. Windmills and any specially designed devices running 15%
on windmills installed on or before 31.3.2014 and any
special devices including electric generators and pumps
running on wind energy installed on or before 31.3.2014
Block 15. Computers including computer software 40%
Block 16. Books (annual publications or other than annual 40%
publications) owned by assessees carrying on a
profession
Block 17. Books owned by assessees carrying on business in 40%
running lending libraries
Block 18. Plant & machinery (General rate) 15%
IV Ships
Block 1. Ocean-going ships 20%
Block 2. Vessels ordinarily operating on inland waters not 20%
covered by Block (3) below
Block 3. Speed boats operating on inland water 20%
PART B INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Know-how, patents, copyrights, trademarks, licences, franchises or 25%
any other business or commercial rights of similar nature, not
being goodwill of a business or profession
Note: Students should refer to Income-tax Rules, 1962 for the detailed
classification of assets under Rule 5(1) and the rates applicable thereto.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. X, a proprietor engaged in manufacturing business, furnishes the following
particulars:
Particulars `
(1) Opening balance of plant and machinery as on 1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV 30,00,000
as on 31.3.2024 after reducing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24)
(2) New plant and machinery purchased and put to use on 8.06.2024 20,00,000
(3) New plant and machinery acquired and put to use on 15.12.2024 8,00,000
(4) Computer acquired and installed in the office premises on 3,00,000
2.1.2025
Compute the amount of depreciation and additional depreciation for the
A.Y. 2025-26, if Mr. X has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Assume that all the assets were
purchased by way of account payee cheque.
SOLUTION
Computation of depreciation and additional depreciation for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Plant & Computer
Machinery (40%)
(15%)
Normal depreciation
@15% on ` 50,00,000 [See Working Notes 1 & 2] 7,50,000 -
@7.5% (50% of 15%, since put to use for less than
180 days) on ` 8,00,000 60,000 -
@20% (50% of 40%, since put to use for less than
180 days) on ` 3,00,000 - 60,000
Additional Depreciation
@20% on ` 20,00,000 (new plant and machinery
put to use for more than 180 days) 4,00,000 -
@10% (50% of 20%, since put to use for less than
180 days) on ` 8,00,000 80,000 -
Total depreciation 12,90,000 60,000
Working Notes:
(1) Computation of written down value of Plant & Machinery
Particulars Plant & Computer
Machinery
(`) (`)
Opening balance as on 1.4.2024 30,00,000 -
Add: Plant & Machinery purchased on 08.6.2024 20,00,000 -
Add: Plant & Machinery acquired on 15.12.2024 8,00,000 -
Computer acquired and installed in the office - 3,00,000
premises
Written down value as on 31.03.2025 58,00,000 3,00,000
(2) Composition of plant and machinery included in the WDV
Plant & Computer
Particulars Machinery
(`) (`)
Plant and machinery put to use for 180 days or 50,00,000
more [` 30,00,000 (WDV) + ` 20,00,000
(purchased on 8.6.2024)]
Plant and machinery put to use for < 180 days 8,00,000 -
Computers put to use for < 180 days - 3,00,000
58,00,000 3,00,000
Notes:
(1) Where an asset acquired during the previous year is put to use for less than
180 days in that previous year, the amount of deduction allowable as
normal depreciation and additional depreciation would be restricted to 50%
of amount computed in accordance with the prescribed percentage.
Therefore, normal depreciation on plant and machinery acquired and put to
use on 15.12.2024 and computer acquired and installed on 02.01.2025, is
restricted to 50% of 15% and 40%, respectively. The additional depreciation
on the said plant and machinery is restricted to ` 80,000, being 10% (i.e.,
50% of 20%) of ` 8 lakh.
Mr. X is eligible for additional depreciation since he has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
(2) As per third proviso to section 32(1)(ii), the balance additional depreciation
of ` 80,000 being 50% of ` 1,60,000 (20% of ` 8,00,000) would be allowed as
deduction in the A.Y.2026-27.
(3) As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in the case of
any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after 31.3.2005 by an
assessee engaged, inter alia, in the business of manufacture or production
of any article or thing, @20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.
However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter
alia, any machinery or plant installed in office premises, residential
accommodation or in any guest house.
Accordingly, additional depreciation is not allowable on computer installed
in the office premises.
(5) Actual Cost [Section 43(1)]
The expression “actual cost” means the actual cost of the asset to the
assessee as reduced by that portion of the cost thereof, if any, as has been
met directly or indirectly by any other person or authority.
However, where an assessee incurs any expenditure for acquisition of any
asset or part thereof in respect of which a payment or aggregate of
payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payee
cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed
electronic mode, exceeds ` 10,000, such expenditure shall not form part of
actual cost of such asset [Second proviso to section 43(1)].
The prescribed electronic modes include credit card, debit card, net
banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment
Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic
Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT
Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].
Actual cost in certain special situations [Explanations to section 43(1)]
(i) Asset used for business after it ceases to be used for scientific
research: Where an asset is used for the purposes of business after it
ceases to be used for scientific research related to that business, the
actual cost to the assessee for depreciation purposes shall be the
actual cost to the assessee as reduced by any deduction allowed
under section 35(1)(iv) [Explanation 1].
(ii) Inventory converted into capital asset and used for business or
profession: Where inventory is converted or treated as a capital asset
and is used for the purpose of business or profession, the fair market
value of such inventory as on the date of its conversion into capital
asset determined in the prescribed manner, shall be the actual cost of
such capital asset to the assessee [Explanation 1A].
(iii) Asset is acquired by way of gift or inheritance: Where an asset is
acquired by way of gift or inheritance, its actual cost shall be the
actual cost to the previous owner minus depreciation allowable to the
assessee as if asset was the only asset in the relevant block of assets
[Explanation 2].
Further, any expenditure incurred by the assessee such as expenditure
on freight, installation etc. of such asset would also be includible in
the actual cost.
(iv) Second hand asset: Where, before the date of its acquisition by the
assessee, the asset was at any time used by any other person for the
purposes of his business or profession, and the Assessing Officer is
satisfied that the main purpose of the transfer of the asset directly or
indirectly to the assessee was the reduction of liability of income-tax
directly or indirectly to the assessee (by claiming depreciation with
reference to an enhanced cost) the actual cost to the assessee shall be
taken to be such an amount which the Assessing Officer may, with the
previous approval of the Joint Commissioner, determine, having
regard to all the circumstances of the case [Explanation 3].
(v) Re-acquisition of asset: Where any asset which had once belonged
to the assessee and had been used by him for the purposes of his
business or profession and thereafter ceased to be his property by
reason of transfer or otherwise, is re-acquired by him, the actual cost
to the assessee shall be —
(a) the actual cost when he first acquired the asset minus
depreciation allowable to the assessee as if asset was the only
asset in the relevant block of assets; or
(b) the actual price for which the asset is re-acquired by him
whichever is less [Explanation 4].
(vi) Acquisition of asset previously owned by any person to whom
such asset is given on lease, hire or otherwise: Where before the
date of acquisition by the assessee say, Mr. A, the assets were at any
time used by any other person, say Mr. B, for the purposes of his
business or profession and depreciation allowance has been claimed
in respect of such assets in the case of Mr. B and such person acquires
on lease, hire or otherwise, assets from Mr. A, then, the actual cost of
the transferred assets, in the case of Mr. A, shall be the same as the
written down value of the said assets at the time of transfer thereof by
Mr. B [Explanation 4A].
Example: We can explain the above as follows—
A person (say “A”) owns an asset and uses it for the purposes of his
business or profession. A has claimed depreciation in respect of such asset.
The said asset is transferred by A to another person (say “B”). A then
acquires the same asset back from B on lease, hire or otherwise. B being
the new owner will be entitled to depreciation. In the above situation, the
cost of acquisition of the transferred assets in the hands of B shall be the
same as the written down value of the said assets at the time of transfer.
Explanation 4A overrides Explanation 3
Explanation 3 to section 43(1) deals with a situation where a transfer
of any asset is made with the main purpose of reduction of tax liability
(by claiming depreciation on enhanced cost), and the Assessing
Officer, having satisfied himself about such purpose of transfer with
the prior approval of the joint commissioner, may determine the
actual cost having regard to all the circumstances of the case.
In the Explanation 4A, a non-obstante clause has been included to the
effect that Explanation 4A will have an overriding effect over
Explanation 3. The result of this is that there is no necessity of finding
out whether the main purpose of the transaction is reduction of tax
liability. Explanation 4A is activated in every situation described above
without inquiring about the main purpose.
(vii) Building previously the property of the assessee: Where a building
which was previously the property of the assessee is brought into use
for the purposes of the business or profession, its actual cost to the
assessee shall be the actual cost of the building to the assessee, as
reduced by an amount equal to the depreciation calculated at the
rates in force on that date that would have been allowable had the
building been used for the purposes of the business or profession
since the date of its acquisition by the assessee [Explanation 5].
ILLUSTRATION 2
A car purchased by Dr. Soman on 10.08.2021 for ` 5,25,000 for personal
use is brought into professional use on 1.07.2024 by him, when its
market value was ` 2,50,000.
Compute the actual cost of the car and the amount of depreciation for the
A.Y. 2025-26 assuming the rate of depreciation to be 15%.
SOLUTION
As per section 43(1), the expression “actual cost” would mean the
actual cost of asset to the assessee.
The purchase price of ` 5,25,000 is, therefore, the actual cost of the
car to Dr. Soman. Market value (i.e. ` 2,50,000) on the date when the
asset is brought into professional use is not relevant.
Therefore, amount of depreciation on car as per section 32 for the
A.Y.2025-26 would be ` 78,750, being ` 5,25,000 x 15%.
Note: Explanation 5 to section 43(1) providing for reduction of notional
depreciation from the date of acquisition of asset for personal use to
determine actual cost of the asset is applicable only in case of building
which is initially acquired for personal use and later brought into
professional use. It is not applicable in respect of other assets.
(viii) Capitalization of interest paid or payable in connection with
acquisition of an asset: Certain taxpayers have, with a view to obtain
more tax benefits and reduce the tax outflow, resorted to the method
of capitalising interest paid or payable in connection with acquisition
of an asset relatable to the period after such asset is first put to use.
This capitalisation implies inclusion of such interest in the ‘Actual Cost’
of the asset for the purposes of claiming depreciation, investment
allowance etc. under the Income-tax Act, 1961. This was never the
legislative intent nor was it in accordance with recognised accounting
practices. Therefore, with a view to counteracting tax avoidance through
this method and placing the matter beyond doubt, Explanation 8 to
section 43(1) provides that any amount paid or payable as interest in
connection with the acquisition of an asset and relatable to period after
asset is first put to use shall not be included and shall be deemed to
have never been included in the actual cost of the asset [Explanation 8].
(ix) Amount of duty of excise or additional duty leviable shall be
reduced if credit is claimed: Where an asset is or has been acquired
by an assessee, the actual cost of asset shall be reduced by the
amount of duty of excise or the additional duty leviable under section
3 of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 in respect of which a claim of credit
has been made and allowed under the Central Excise Rules, 19445
[Explanation 9].
(x) Subsidy or grant or reimbursement: Where a portion of the cost of
an asset acquired by the assessee has been met directly or indirectly
by the Central Government or a State Government or any authority
established under any law or by any other person, in the form of a
subsidy or grant or reimbursement (by whatever name called), then, so
much of the cost as is relatable to such subsidy or grant or
reimbursement shall not be included in the actual cost of the asset to
the assessee.
However, where such subsidy or grant or reimbursement is of such
nature that it cannot be directly relatable to the asset acquired, so
much of the amount which bears to the total subsidy or
reimbursement or grant the same proportion as such asset bears to all
the assets in respect of or with reference to which the subsidy or grant
or reimbursement is so received, shall not be included in the actual
cost of the asset to the assessee [Explanation 10].
(xi) Asset is acquired outside India by an assessee, being a non-
resident and such asset is brought by him to India: Where an asset
is acquired outside India by an assessee, being a non-resident and
such asset is brought by him to India and used for the purposes of his
business or profession, the actual cost of asset to the assessee shall be
the actual cost the asset to the assessee, as reduced by an amount
equal to the amount of depreciation calculated at the rate in force
that would have been allowable had the asset been used in India for
the said purposes since the date of its acquisition by the assessee
[Explanation 11].
(xii) Capital asset on which deduction is allowable under section 35AD:
Explanation 13 to section 43(1) provides that the actual cost of any
capital asset, on which deduction has been allowed or is allowable to
the assessee under section 35AD, shall be Nil.
5 Now Central Excise Rules, 2002
This would be applicable in the case of transfer of asset by the
assessee where -
(1) the assessee himself has claimed deduction under section 35AD;
or
(2) the previous owner has claimed deduction under section 35AD.
This would be applicable where the capital asset is acquired by
the assessee by way of -
(a) gift, will or an irrevocable trust;
(b) any distribution on liquidation of the company;
(c) any distribution of capital assets on total or partial
partition of a HUF;
(d) any transfer of a capital asset by a holding company to its
100% subsidiary company, being an Indian company;
(e) any transfer of a capital asset by a subsidiary company to
its 100% holding company, being an Indian company;
(f) any transfer of a capital asset by the amalgamating
company to an amalgamated company in a scheme of
amalgamation, if the amalgamated company is an Indian
company;
(g) any transfer of a capital asset by the demerged company
to the resulting company in a scheme of demerger, if the
resulting company is an Indian company;
(h) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a firm
to a company as a result of succession of the firm by a
company in the business carried on by the firm, or any
transfer of a capital asset to a company in the course of
demutualization or corporatisation of a recognized stock
exchange in India as a result of which an association of
persons or body of individuals is succeeded by such
company (fulfilling the conditions specified);
(i) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a sole
proprietary concern to a company, where the sole
proprietary concern is succeeded by a company (fulfilling
the conditions specified).
(j) any transfer of a capital asset or intangible asset by a
private company or unlisted public company to an LLP as a
result of conversion of the such company into LLP
(fulfilling the conditions prescribed).
However, where an asset, in respect of which deduction is
claimed and allowed under section 35AD is deemed to be the
income of the assessee in accordance with the provisions of
section 35AD(7B) (on account of asset, being used for a purpose
other than specified business under section 35AD), the actual
cost of the asset to the assessee shall be actual cost to assessee
as reduced by the amount of depreciation allowable had the
asset been used for the purpose of business, calculated at the
rate in force, since the date of its acquisition [Proviso to
Explanation 13 to section 43(1)].
(6) Written down value [Section 43(6)]
(i) Assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year: In the
case of assets acquired by the assessee during the previous year, the
written down value means the actual cost to the assessee.
(ii) Assets acquired before the previous year: In the case of assets
acquired before the previous year, the written down value would be
the actual cost to the assessee less the aggregate of all deductions
actually allowed in respect of depreciation.
For this purpose, any depreciation carried forward is deemed to be
depreciation actually allowed [Section 43(6)(c)(i) read with
Explanation 3].
(iii) In case of any block of assets: The written down value of any block
of assets shall be worked out as under in accordance with section
43(6)(c):
(1) W.D.V. of the block of assets in immediately xxx
preceding previous year
(2) Less: Depreciation actually allowed in respect of that xxx
block of assets in said preceding previous year
Opening balance as on 1st April of the current P.Y. xxx
Increased by
(3) Actual cost of assets acquired during the previous xxx
year, not being on account of acquisition of goodwill
of a business or profession
(4) Total (1) - (2) + (3) xxx
Reduced by
(5) Money receivable in respect of any asset falling xxx
within the block which is sold, discarded, demolished
or destroyed during that previous year together with
scrap value. However, such amount cannot exceed
the amount in (4).
(6) In case of slump sale, actual cost of the asset (-) xxx
amount of depreciation that would have been
allowable to the assessee for any assessment year as
if the asset was the only asset in the block. However,
such amount of reduction cannot exceed the WDV.
(7) W.D.V at the end of the year (on which depreciation xxx
is allowable) [(4) – (5) – (6)]
(8) Depreciation at the prescribed rate
(Rate of Depreciation × WDV arrived at in (7) above) xxx
(iv) Depreciation provided in the books of account deemed to be
depreciation actually allowed: Section 32(1)(ii) provides that
depreciation shall be allowed at the prescribed percentage on the
written down value (WDV) of any block of assets. Section 43(6)(b)
provides that written down value in the case of assets acquired before
the previous year means the actual cost to the assessee less all
depreciation actually allowed to him under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Persons who were exempt from tax were not required to compute
their income under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”. However, when the exemption is withdrawn subsequently,
such persons became liable to income-tax and hence, were required
to compute their income for income-tax purposes. In this regard, a
question arises as to the basis on which depreciation is to be allowed
under the Income-tax Act, 1961 in respect of assets acquired during
the years when the person was exempt from tax.
Explanation 6 to section 43(6) provides that,-
(a) the actual cost of an asset has to be adjusted by the amount
attributable to the revaluation of such asset, if any, in the books
of account;
(b) the total amount of depreciation on such asset provided in the
books of account of the assessee in respect of such previous year
or years preceding the previous year relevant to the assessment
year under consideration shall be deemed to be the depreciation
actually allowed under the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the purposes
of section 43(6);
(c) the depreciation actually allowed as above has to be adjusted by
the amount of depreciation attributable to such revaluation.
(v) Composite Income: Explanation 7 provides that in cases of
‘composite income’, for the purpose of computing written down value
of assets acquired before the previous year, the total amount of
depreciation shall be computed as if the entire composite income of
the assessee is chargeable under the head “Profits and Gains of
business or profession”. The depreciation so computed shall be
deemed to have been “actually allowed” to the assessee.
Rule 8 prescribes the taxability of income from the manufacture of tea.
Under the said rule, income derived from the sale of tea grown and
manufactured by seller shall be computed as if it were income derived
from business and 40% of such income shall be deemed to be income
liable to tax.
Example: If the turnover is, say, ` 20 lakh, the depreciation ` 1 lakh
and other expenses ` 4 lakh, then the income would be ` 15 lakh.
Business income would be ` 6 lakh (being 40% of ` 15 lakh). In this
case, ` 1 lakh, being the amount of depreciation would be deemed to
have been actually allowed.
Accordingly, the WDV is required to be computed by deducting the full
depreciation attributable to composite income i.e., ` 1 lakh.
(vi) Cases where the Written Down Value reduced to nil: The written
down value of any block of assets, may be reduced to nil for any of
the following reasons:
(a) The moneys receivable by the assessee in regard to the assets
sold or otherwise transferred during the previous year together
with the amount of scrap value may exceed the written down
value at the beginning of the year as increased by the actual
cost of any new asset acquired, or
(b) All the assets in the relevant block may be transferred during the year.
(7) Carry forward and set off of depreciation [Section 32(2)]
Section 32(2) provides for carry forward of unabsorbed depreciation. Where,
in any previous year the profits or gains chargeable are not sufficient to give
full effect to the depreciation allowance, the unabsorbed depreciation shall
be added to the depreciation allowance for the following previous year and
shall be deemed to be part of that allowance. If no depreciation allowance is
available for that previous year, the unabsorbed depreciation of the earlier
previous year shall become the depreciation allowance of that year. The
effect of this provision is that the unabsorbed depreciation shall be carried
forward indefinitely till it is fully set off.
In a case where the assessee is paying tax under default tax regime under
section 115BAC and there is a depreciation allowance in respect of a block
of asset from an earlier assessment year attributable to additional
depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia), which has not been given full effect to prior to
A.Y. 2024-25 and which is not allowed to be set-off in the A.Y.2024-25,
corresponding adjustment shall be made to the WDV of such block of assets
as on 1.4.2023 in the prescribed manner i.e., the WDV as on 1.4.2023 will be
increased by the unabsorbed additional depreciation not allowed to be set-
off.
Order of set-off
In the order of set-off of losses under different heads of income, effect shall
first be given to business losses and then to unabsorbed depreciation.
The provisions in effect are as follows:
• Since the unabsorbed depreciation forms part of the current year’s
depreciation, it can be set off against any other head of income except
“Salaries”.
• The unabsorbed depreciation can be carried forward for indefinite
number of previous years.
• Set off will be allowed even if the same business to which it relates is
no longer in existence in the year in which the set off takes place.
Current depreciation to be deducted first - The Supreme Court, in CIT v.
Mother India Refrigeration (P.) Ltd. [1985] 23 Taxman 8, has categorically
held that current depreciation must be deducted first before deducting the
unabsorbed carried forward business losses of the earlier years in giving set
off while computing the total income of any particular year.
ORDER OF SET-OFF
Brought
Current Year Unabsorbed
forward
Depreciation depreciation
Business Loss
ILLUSTRATION 3
A newly qualified Chartered Accountant Mr. Dhaval, commenced practice and has
acquired the following assets in his office during F.Y. 2024-25 at the cost shown
against each item. Calculate the amount of depreciation that can be claimed from
his professional income for A.Y.2025-26. Assume that all the assets were purchased
by way of account payee cheque.
Sl. Description Date of Date when Amount
No. acquisition put to use `
1. Computer including computer software 27 Sept., 24 1 Oct., 24 35,000
2. Computer UPS 2 Oct., 24 8 Oct., 24 8,500
3. Computer printer 1 Oct., 24 1 Oct., 24 12,500
4. Books (other than annual 1 Apr., 24 1 Apr., 24 13,000
publications are of ` 12,000)
5. Office furniture 1 Apr., 24 1 Apr., 24 3,00,000
(Acquired from a practicing C.A.)
6. Laptop 26 Sep., 24 8 Oct., 24 43,000
SOLUTION
Computation of depreciation allowable for A.Y.2025-26
Asset Rate Depreciation
(`)
Block 1 Furniture [See working note below] 10% 30,000
Block 2 Plant (Computer including computer software,
Computer UPS, Laptop, Printers and Books) [See
working note below] 40% 34,500
Total depreciation allowable 64,500
Working Note:
Computation of depreciation
Block of Assets
`
Block 1: Furniture – [Rate of depreciation - 10%]
Put to use for more than 180 days [` 3,00,000@10%] 30,000
Block 2: Plant [Rate of depreciation- 40%]
(a) Computer including computer software (put to use for more than 14,000
180 days) [` 35,000 @ 40%]
(b) Computer UPS (put to use for less than 180 days) [` 8,500 @20%] 1,700
[See note below]
(c) Computer Printer (put to use for more than 180 days) 5,000
[` 12,500 @40%]
(d) Laptop (put to use for less than 180 days) [` 43,000 @20%] [See 8,600
note below]
(e) Books (being annual publications or other than annual publications)
(Put to use for more than 180 days) [` 13,000 @40%] 5,200
34,500
Note - Where an asset is acquired by the assessee during the previous year and is put
to use for the purposes of business or profession for a period of less than 180 days,
the deduction on account of depreciation would be restricted to 50% of the prescribed
rate. In this case, since Mr. Dhaval commenced his practice in the P.Y. 2024-25 and
acquired the assets during the same year, the restriction of depreciation to 50% of the
prescribed rate would apply to those assets which have been put to use for less than
180 days in that year, namely, laptop and computer UPS.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. Gamma, a proprietor started a business of manufacture of tyres and tubes for
motor vehicles on 1.1.2024. The manufacturing unit was set up on 1.5.2024. He
commenced his manufacturing operations on 1.6.2024. The total cost of the plant
and machinery installed in the unit is ` 120 crore. The said plant and machinery
included second hand plant and machinery bought for ` 20 crore and new plant
and machinery for scientific research relating to the business of the assessee
acquired at a cost of ` 15 crore.
Compute the amount of depreciation allowable under section 32 of the Income-tax
Act, 1961 in respect of the assessment year 2025-26. Assume that all the assets
were purchased by way of account payee cheque and Mr. Gamma has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of depreciation allowable for the A.Y. 2025-26
in the hands of Mr. Gamma
Particulars ` in crore
Total cost of plant and machinery 120.00
Less: Used for Scientific Research (Note 1) 15.00
105.00
Normal Depreciation at 15% on ` 105 crore 15.75
Additional Depreciation:
Cost of plant and machinery 120.00
Less: Second-hand plant and machinery (Note 2) 20.00
Plant and machinery used for scientific
research, the whole of the actual cost of
which is allowable as deduction u/s 35(1)(iv)
15.00 35.00
read with section 35(2)(ia) (Note 2)
85.00
Additional Depreciation at 20% 17.00
Depreciation allowable for A.Y.2025-26 32.75
Notes:
1. As per section 35(2)(iv), no depreciation shall be allowed in respect of plant
and machinery purchased for scientific research relating to assessee’s
business, since deduction is allowable under section 35 in respect of such
capital expenditure.
2. Mr. Gamma is entitled to additional depreciation since he has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in
the case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after 31.3.2005
by an assessee engaged in, inter alia, the business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing, at the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such
machinery or plant.
However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter alia, –
(i) any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee,
was used either within or outside India by any other person;
(ii) any machinery or plant, the whole of the actual cost of which is
allowed as a deduction (whether by way of depreciation or otherwise)
in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profit and gains
of business or profession” of any one previous year.
In view of the above provisions, additional depreciation cannot be claimed
in respect of -
(i) Second hand plant and machinery;
(ii) New plant and machinery purchased for scientific research relating to
assessee’s business in respect of which the whole of the capital
expenditure can be claimed as deduction under section 35(1)(iv) read
with section 35(2)(ia) & (iv).
(8) Building, machinery, plant and furniture not exclusively used for
business purpose [Section 38(2)]
Where any building, plant and machinery, furniture is not exclusively used
for the purposes of business or profession, the deduction on account of
expenses on account of current repairs to the premises, insurance premium
of the premises, current repairs and insurance premium of machinery, plant
and furniture and depreciation in respect of these assets shall be restricted
to a fair proportionate part thereof, which the Assessing Officer may
determine having regard to the user of such asset for the purposes of the
business or profession.
(9) Balancing Charge
Section 41(2) provides for the manner of calculation of the amount which
shall be chargeable to income-tax as income of the business of the previous
year in which the monies payable for the building, machinery, plant or
furniture on which depreciation has been claimed under section 32(1)(i), i.e.
in the case of power undertakings, is sold, discarded, demolished or
destroyed. The balancing charge will be the amount by which the moneys
payable in respect of such building, machinery, plant or furniture, together
with the amount of scrap value, if any, exceeds the written down value.
However, the amount of balancing charge should not exceed the difference
between the actual cost and the WDV. The tax shall be levied in the year in
which the moneys payable become due.
The Explanation below section 41(2) makes it clear that where the moneys
payable in respect of the building, machinery, plant or furniture referred to
in section 41(2) becomes due in a previous year in which the business, for
the purpose of which the building, machinery, plant or furniture was being
used, is no longer in existence, these provisions will apply as if the business
is in existence in that previous year.
(iv) Expenditure on Scientific Research [Section 35]
This section allows a deduction in respect of any expenditure on scientific
research (activities for extension of knowledge in the fields of natural or
applied science, including agriculture, animal husbandry or fisheries)
incurred in relation to the business of the assessee or contribution by the
assessee for scientific research or social science or statistical research.
However, it does include expenditure incurred in acquisition of rights in or
arising out of scientific research.
The deduction allowable under this section is depicted in the diagram
below:
(I) Incurred by assessee:
(i) Revenue Expenditure: Any revenue expenditure incurred by the
assessee on scientific research related to his business would be
allowed as deduction in the year in which it was incurred. Expenditure
incurred within 3 years immediately preceding the commencement of
the business on payment of salary to research personnel engaged in
scientific research related to his business carried on by the taxpayer or
on purchase of material inputs for such scientific research will be
allowed as deduction in the year in which the business is commenced.
The deduction will be limited to the amount certified by the
prescribed authority [Section 35(1)(i)].
hcraeser
cifitneicS
no
erutidnepxE
Revenue Expenditure 100% of the
expenditure
incurred
(other than
Capital Expenditure
expenditure
Incurred by assessee on
on land)
scientific research related
to business
Approved Indian company for
scientific research
100%
of sum
paid
Notified approved University/ college/
Research association/ other institution
for social science or statistical
research
Paid to
Notified approved University/ college/
Research association/ other institution 100% of
for scientific research
sum
paid
Approved National
Laboratory/university/IIT/ specified
person for scientific research
undertaken under an approved
programme
(ii) Capital Expenditure: Any expenditure of a capital nature on scientific
research related to the business carried on by the assessee would be
deductible in full in the previous year in which it is incurred [Section
35(1)(iv)].
(a) Capital expenditure prior to commencement of business
The Explanation 1 to section 35(2)(ia) specifically provides that
where any capital expenditure has been incurred prior to the
commencement of the business, the aggregate of the
expenditure so incurred within the three years immediately
preceding the commencement of the business shall be deemed
to have been incurred in the previous year in which the business
is commenced and will rank for deduction as expenditure for
scientific research incurred during the previous year.
Expenditure on land disallowed
No deduction will be allowed in respect of capital expenditure
incurred on the acquisition of any land whether the land is
acquired as such or as part of any property.
(b) Carry forward of unabsorbed capital expenditure on
scientific research
Capital expenditure incurred on scientific research which cannot
be absorbed by the business profits of the relevant previous year
can be carried forward to the immediately succeeding previous
year and shall be treated as the allowance for that year. In effect,
this means that there is no time bar on the period of carry
forward. It shall be accordingly allowable for that previous year
against any head of income other than salaries [Section 35(4)].
(c) Depreciation not admissible
Section 35(2)(iv) clarifies that no depreciation will be admissible
on any capital asset represented by expenditure which has been
allowed as a deduction under section 35 whether in the year in
which deduction under section 35 was allowed or in any other
previous year.
(d) Sale of asset representing expenditure of capital nature on
scientific research
Section 41, inter alia, seeks to tax the profits arising on the sale
of an asset representing expenditure of a capital nature on
scientific research.
Where the asset representing expenditure of a capital nature on
scientific research is sold without having been used for other
purposes, the provisions of section 41(3) would be attracted. If
the proceeds of sale together with the total amount of the
deductions made under section 35(1)(iv) exceed the amount of
capital expenditure, the excess or the amount of deduction so
made, whichever is less, will be charged to tax as income of the
business of the previous year in which the sale took place.
In simple words, since amount of deduction under section
35(1)(iv) is equal to the amount of expenditure, lower of amount
of sale proceeds or deduction allowed under section 35(1)(iv) will
be the charged to tax as income of the business in the previous
year in which the asset is sold.
Deduction under section 35(1)(i) and 35(1)(iv) read with
section 35(2) would be available to an assessee under both
regimes, subject to fulfillment of stipulated conditions.
(II) Amount contributed or paid to:
(i) Notified approved research association, university, college or
other institution: A sum equal to any amount paid to –
- a research association which has as its object the undertaking of
scientific research or
- to a university, college or other institution to be used for
scientific research
provided that such university, college, institution or association is
approved for this purpose and notified by the Central Government.
[Section 35(1)(ii)]
Deduction u/s 35(1)(ii) would be available to an assessee
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) Approved Indian company for scientific research: A sum equal to
any amount paid to a company to be used by it for scientific research
[Section 35(1)(iia)]
However, such deduction would be available only if:
- the company is registered in India and
- has as its main object the scientific research and development.
Further, it should be approved by the prescribed authority and should
fulfill the other prescribed conditions.
Deduction u/s 35(1)(iia) would be available to an assessee
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(iii) Approved notified research association, university, college or
other institution: A sum equal to any amount paid to
- a research association which has as its object the undertaking of
research in social science or statistical research or
- to a university, college or other institution to be used for
research in a social science or statistical research
provided that they are approved for this purpose and notified by the
Central Government [Section 35(1)(iii)].
Further, it has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee
(i.e. donor) is entitled on account of payment of any sum to a research
association or university or college or other institution for scientific
research or research in a social science or statistical research or to a
company for scientific research, shall not be denied merely on the
ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the
approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn.
Deduction u/s 35(1)(iii) would be available to an assessee
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(iv) Sum paid to National Laboratory, etc. [Section 35(2AA)]: Section
35(2AA) provides that any sum paid by an assessee to a National
Laboratory or University or Indian Institute of Technology or a
specified person for carrying out approved programmes of scientific
research approved by the prescribed authority will be eligible for
deduction of the amount so paid.
No other deduction under the Act: No contribution which qualifies
for deduction under this clause will be entitled to deduction under any
other provision of the Act.
It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee is entitled
on account of payment of any sum by him to an approved National
Laboratory, University, Indian Institute of Technology or a specified
person for the approved programme shall not be denied to the
donor-assessee merely on the ground that after payment of such sum
by him, the approval granted to any of the aforesaid donee-entities or
the programme has been withdrawn.
Term Meaning
Specified person A person who is approved by the prescribed authority
Deduction u/s 35(2AA) would be available to an assessee only
if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
ILLUSTRATION 5
Mr. A, furnishes the following particulars for the P.Y.2024-25. Compute the
deduction allowable under section 35 for A.Y.2025-26, while computing his income
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, if.
(i) he is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
(ii) he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)
Particulars `
1. Amount paid to notified approved Indian Institute of Science, 1,00,000
Bangalore, for scientific research
2. Amount paid to IIT, Delhi for an approved scientific research 2,50,000
programme
3. Amount paid to X Ltd., a company registered in India which has 4,00,000
as its main object scientific research and development, as is
approved by the prescribed authority
4. Expenditure incurred on in-house scientific research and
development facility as approved by the prescribed authority
related to his business
(a) Revenue expenditure on scientific research 3,00,000
(b) Capital expenditure (including cost of acquisition of land 7,50,000
` 5,00,000) on scientific research
SOLUTION
(i) If Mr. A is paying tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Computation of deduction under section 35 for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
Section Allowability Amount of
deduction (`)
Payment for
scientific research
Indian Institute of 1,00,000 35(1)(ii) Not allowable Nil
Science, Bangalore under default
tax regime
IIT, Delhi 2,50,000 35(2AA) Nil
X Ltd. 4,00,000 35(1)(iia) Nil
Expenditure incurred
on in-house research
and development
facility
Revenue expenditure 3,00,000 35(1)(i) Allowable 3,00,000
under default
Capital expenditure 2,50,000 35(1)(iv) 2,50,000
tax regime
(excluding cost of read with
acquisition of land 35(2)(ia)
` 5,00,000)
Deduction allowable under section 35 5,50,000
(ii) If Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)
Computation of deduction under section 35 for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
Section % of Amount
deduction of
deduction
(`)
Payment for scientific
research
Indian Institute of Science 1,00,000 35(1)(ii) 100% 1,00,000
IIT, Delhi 2,50,000 35(2AA) 100% 2,50,000
X Ltd. 4,00,000 35(1)(iia) 100% 4,00,000
Expenditure incurred on
in-house research and
development facility
Revenue expenditure 3,00,000 35(1)(i) 100% 3,00,000
Capital expenditure 2,50,000 35(1)(iv) 100% 2,50,000
(excluding cost of read
acquisition of land with
` 5,00,000) 35(2)(ia)
Deduction allowable under section 35 13,00,000
(v) “Investment-linked tax incentives” for specified businesses
[Section 35AD]
(1) List of specified businesses: Although there are a plethora of tax incentives
available under the Income-tax Act, 1961 they do not fulfill the intended
purpose of creating infrastructure since these incentives are linked to profits
and consequently, have the effect of diverting profits from the taxable
sector to the tax-free sector.
With the specific objective of creating rural infrastructure and environment
friendly alternate means for transportation of bulk goods, investment-linked
tax incentives have been introduced for specified businesses, namely –
• setting-up and operating ‘cold chain’ facilities for specified products;
• setting-up and operating warehousing facilities for storing agricultural
produce;
• laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or
petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including storage
facilities being an integral part of such network;
• building and operating a hotel of two-star or above category,
anywhere in India;
• building and operating a hospital, anywhere in India, with at least 100
beds for patients;
• developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme
for slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by the Central
Government or a State Government.
• developing and building a housing project under a notified scheme
for affordable housing framed by the Central Government or State
Government;
• production of fertilizer in India;
• setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container
freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962;
• bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax;
• setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar;
• laying and operating a slurry pipeline for the transportation of iron ore;
• setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication
manufacturing unit, if such unit is notified by the Board in accordance
with the prescribed guidelines;
• developing or maintaining and operating or developing, maintaining
and operating a new infrastructure facility.
(2) Deduction for Capital Expenditure: 100% of the capital expenditure
incurred during the previous year, wholly and exclusively for the above
businesses would be allowed as deduction from the business income to the
assessee opting for deduction under section 35AD.
However, expenditure incurred on acquisition of any land, goodwill
or financial instrument would not be eligible for deduction.
Further, any expenditure in respect of which payment or aggregate
of payment made to a person of an amount exceeding ` 10,000 in a day
otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or an account
payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system through a bank
account or through such other prescribed electronic mode would not be
eligible for deduction. The prescribed electronic modes include credit card,
debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified
Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National
Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar
Pay [Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020]
In case of an individual/HUF/AoP/BoI carrying on specified
business, deduction u/s 35AD would be available only if they
exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A). If such assessee is paying concessional
rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC, deduction u/s 35AD
would not be available.
A company would not be eligible for deduction under section 35AD, if it opts
for the special provisions of section 115BAA/115BAB.
(3) Expenditure prior to commencement of operation: Further, the
expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the purpose of specified
business prior to commencement of operation would be allowed as
deduction during the previous year in which the assessee commences
operation of his specified business.
The amount incurred prior to commencement should be capitalized in the
books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its
operations.
(4) Conditions to be fulfilled: For claiming deduction under section 35AD, the
specified business should fulfill the following conditions –
(i) it should not be set up by splitting up, or the reconstruction, of a
business already in existence;
(ii) it should not be set up by the transfer to the specified business of
machinery or plant previously used for any purpose;
In order to satisfy this condition, the total value of the plant or
machinery so transferred should not exceed 20% of the value of
the total plant or machinery used in such specified business.
For the purpose of this condition, machinery or plant would not be
regarded as previously used if it had been used outside India by
any person other than the assessee provided the following
conditions are satisfied:
(a) such plant or machinery was not, at any time prior to the
date of its installation by the assessee, used in India;
(b) the plant or machinery was imported into India from a
foreign Country; and
(c) no deduction on account of depreciation in respect of such
plant or machinery has been allowed to any person at any
time prior to the date of installation by the assessee.
(5) No deduction under section 10AA or Chapter VI-A under the heading
“C - Deductions in respect of certain incomes”: Where a deduction under
this section is claimed and allowed in respect of the specified business for
any assessment year, no deduction under the provisions of Chapter VI-A
under the heading “C - Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or section
10AA is permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or
any other assessment year.
Correspondingly, section 80A has been amended to provide that where a
deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading “C –
Deductions in respect of certain incomes” is claimed and allowed in respect
of the profits of such specified business for any assessment year, no
deduction under section 35AD is permissible in relation to such specified
business for the same or any other assessment year.
In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction
under section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business,
he cannot claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C -
Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or section 10AA for the same or
any other year and vice versa.
(6) No deduction allowable under the Act in respect of expenditure for
which deduction allowed under this section: The assessee cannot claim
deduction in respect of such expenditure incurred for specified business
under any other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the current year or
under this section for any other year, if the deduction has been claimed or
opted by him and allowed to him under section 35AD.
(7) Date of Commencement of specified businesses:
S. Specified business Date of
No. commencement
of operations
1. Laying and operating a cross country natural gas on or after
pipeline network for distribution, including 1st April, 2007
storage facilities being an integral part of such
network
2. (a) building and operating anywhere in India, on or after
a hotel of two-star or above category as 1st April, 2010
specified by the Central Government
(b) building and operating a hospital with at
least 100 beds for patients
(c) notified scheme for slum redevelopment
or rehabilitation housing projects
3. (a) notified scheme for affordable housing on or after
projects and 1st April, 2011
(b) production of fertilizer in a new plant or in a
newly installed capacity in an existing plant
4. (a) setting up and operating an inland on or after
container depot or a container freight 1st April, 2012
station notified or approved under the
Customs Act, 1962,
(b) bee-keeping and production of honey and
beeswax and
(c) setting up and operating a warehousing
facility for storage of sugar
5. (a) laying and operating a slurry pipeline for on or after
the transportation of iron ore or 1st April, 2014
(b) setting up and operating a semi-conductor
wafer fabrication manufacturing unit
6. developing or operating and maintaining or on or after
developing, operating and maintaining, any 1st April, 2017
infrastructure facility
7. In any other case, namely, setting and on or after
operating- 1st April, 2009
(a) “cold-chain” facilities for specified
products or
(b) warehousing facilities for storing
agricultural produce
(8) Meaning of certain terms
Term Meaning
Cold chain A chain of facilities for storage or transportation of
facility agricultural and forest produce, meat and meat products,
poultry, marine and dairy products, products of
horticulture, floriculture and apiculture and processed
food items under scientifically controlled conditions
including refrigeration and other facilities necessary for
the preservation of such produce.
Associated In relation to the assessee means a person—
person (i) who participates directly or indirectly or through one
or more intermediaries in the management or
control or capital of the assessee;
(ii) who holds, directly or indirectly, shares carrying not
less than 26% of the voting power in the capital of
the assessee;
(iii) who appoints more than half of the Board of
directors or members of the governing board, or one
or more executive directors or executive members of
the governing board of the assessee; or
(iv) who guarantees not less than 10% of the total
borrowings of the assessee.
Infrastructure (i) A road including toll road, a bridge or a rail system.
facility (ii) A highway project including housing or other activities
being an integral part of the highway project.
(iii) A water supply project, water treatment system,
irrigation project, sanitation and sewerage system or
solid waste management system.
(iv) A port, airport, inland waterway, inland port or
navigational channel in the sea.
(9) Set-off or carry forward and set-off of loss from specified business:
The loss of an assessee claiming deduction u/s 35AD in respect of a
specified business can be set-off against the profit of another specified
business u/s 73A, irrespective of whether the latter is eligible for deduction
u/s 35AD.
Example: A assessee, exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), can therefore, set-off the losses of
a hospital or hotel which begins to operate after 1st April, 2010 and which is
eligible for deduction section 35AD, against the profits of the existing business
of operating a hospital (with atleast 100 beds for patients) or a hotel (of two-
star or above category), even if the latter is not eligible for deduction under
section 35AD.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Mr. A commenced operations of the businesses of setting up a warehousing facility
for storage of food grains, sugar and edible oil on 1.4.2024. He incurred capital
expenditure of ` 80 lakh, ` 60 lakh and ` 50 lakh, respectively, on purchase of land
and building during the period January, 2024 to March, 2024 exclusively for the
above businesses, and capitalized the same in its books of account as on 1st April,
2023. The cost of land included in the above figures is ` 50 lakh, ` 40 lakh and ` 30
lakh, respectively. During the P.Y. 2024-25, he incurred capital expenditure of ` 20
lakh, ` 15 lakh & ` 10 lakh, respectively, for extension/reconstruction of the
building purchased and used exclusively for the above businesses.
Compute the income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”
for the A.Y.2025-26 and the loss to be carried forward, assuming that Mr. A is
exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A) and has fulfilled all the conditions specified under section 35AD
and wants to claim deduction under section 35AD and has not claimed any
deduction under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of
certain incomes”.
The profits from the business of setting up a warehousing facility for storage of food
grains, sugar and edible oil (before claiming deduction under section 35AD and
section 32) for the A.Y. 2025-26 is ` 16 lakhs, ` 14 lakhs and ` 31 lakhs,
respectively. Also, assume in respect of expenditure incurred, the payments are
made by account payee cheque or use of ECS through bank account.
SOLUTION
Computation of profits and gains of business or profession for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars ` (in lakhs)
Profit from business of setting up of warehouse for storage of 31
edible oil (before providing for depreciation under section 32)
Less: Depreciation under section 32
10% of ` 30 lakh, being (` 50 lakh – ` 30 lakh + ` 10 lakh) 3
Income chargeable under “Profits and gains from business or 28
profession”
Computation of income/loss from specified business under section 35AD
Food Sugar Total
Particulars Grains
` (in lakhs)
(A) Profits from the specified business of setting up
a warehousing facility (before providing
deduction u/s 35AD) 16 14 30
Less: Deduction under section 35AD
(B) Capital expenditure incurred prior to 1.4.2024
(i.e., prior to commencement of business) and
capitalized in the books of account as on
1.4.2024 (excluding the expenditure incurred on
acquisition of land) = ` 30 lakh (` 80 lakh – ` 50
lakh) and ` 20 lakh (` 60 lakh – ` 40 lakh) 30 20 50
(C) Capital expenditure incurred during the 20 15 35
P.Y. 2024-25
(D) Total capital expenditure (B + C) 50 35 85
(E) Deduction under section 35AD
100% of capital expenditure (food grains/ sugar) 50 35 85
Total deduction u/s 35AD for A.Y.2025-26 50 35 85
(F) Loss from the specified business of setting up
and operating a warehousing facility (after
providing for deduction under section 35AD)
to be carried forward as per section 73A (A-E) (34) (21) (55)
Notes:
(i) Deduction of 100% of the capital expenditure is available under section 35AD
for A.Y.2025-26 in respect of specified business of setting up and operating a
warehousing facility for storage of sugar and setting up and operating a
warehousing facility for storage of agricultural produce where operations are
commenced on or after 1.4.2012 or on or after 1.4.2009, respectively.
(ii) However, since setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of
edible oils is not a specified business, Mr. A is not eligible for deduction under
section 35AD in respect of capital expenditure incurred in respect of such business.
(iii) Mr. A can, however, claim depreciation@10% under section 32 in respect of
the capital expenditure incurred on buildings. It is presumed that the
buildings were put to use for more than 180 days during the P.Y.2024-25.
(iv) Loss from a specified business can be set-off only against profits from
another specified business. Therefore, the loss of ` 55 lakh from the
specified businesses of setting up and operating a warehousing facility for
storage of food grains and sugar cannot be set-off against the profits of
` 28 lakh from the business of setting and operating a warehousing facility
for storage of edible oils, since the same is not a specified business. Such
loss can, however, be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against profits
of the same or any other specified business.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Mr. Suraj, a proprietor, commenced operations of the business of a new three-star
hotel in Madurai, Tamil Nadu on 1.4.2024. He incurred capital expenditure of ` 50
lakh during the period January, 2024 to March, 2024 exclusively for the above
business, and capitalized the same in his books of account as on 1st April, 2024.
Further, during the P.Y. 2024-25, he incurred capital expenditure of ` 2 crore (out of
which ` 1.50 crore was for acquisition of land) exclusively for the above business.
Compute the income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”
for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming that he has fulfilled all the conditions specified under
section 35AD and opted for claiming deduction under section 35AD; and he has not
claimed any deduction under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in
respect of certain incomes”. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
The profits from the business of running this hotel (before claiming deduction under
section 35AD) for the A.Y.2025-26 is ` 25 lakhs. Assume that he also has another
existing business of running a four-star hotel in Coimbatore, which commenced
operations fifteen years back, the profits from which are ` 120 lakhs for the A.Y.
2025-26. Also, assume that payments for capital expenditure were made by net banking.
SOLUTION
Computation of profits and gains of business or profession for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Profits from the specified business of new hotel in Madurai 25 lakh
(before providing deduction under section 35AD)
Less: Deduction under section 35AD
Capital expenditure incurred during the P.Y.2024-25
(excluding the expenditure incurred on acquisition of
land) = ` 200 lakh – ` 150 lakh 50 lakh
Capital expenditure incurred prior to 1.4.2024 (i.e.,
prior to commencement of business) and capitalized in
the books of account as on 1.4.2024 50 lakh
Total deduction under section 35AD for A.Y.2025-26 100 lakh
Loss from the specified business of new hotel in Madurai (75 lakh)
Profit from the existing business of running a hotel in Coimbatore 120 lakh
Net profit from business after set-off of loss of specified business 45 lakh
against profits of another specified business under section 73A
(10) Other conditions contained under section 35AD
S. Particulars Condition
No.
1. Audit of accounts The deduction shall be allowed to the
assessee only if the accounts of the assessee
for the relevant P.Y. have been audited by a
chartered accountant and the assessee
furnishes the audit report in the prescribed
form, duly signed and verified by such
accountant.
2. Asset to be used for Section 35AD(7A) provides that any asset
specified business for in respect of which a deduction is claimed
eight years and allowed u/s 35AD shall be used only
for the specified business for a period of
eight years beginning with the previous
year in which such asset is acquired or
constructed.
3. (i) Asset demolished, If any asset on which a deduction u/s 35AD
destroyed, discarded has been claimed and allowed, is
or transferred for demolished, destroyed, discarded or
which a deduction has transferred, the sum received or receivable
been allowed for the same is chargeable to tax u/s 28(vii).
This does not take into account a case where
asset on which deduction u/s 35AD has been
claimed is used for any purpose other than
the specified business by way of a mode
other than that specified above.
(ii) Asset used for As per section 35AD(7B), if asset is used for
any other business any purpose other than the specified
other than specified business during 8 years beginning with the
business during 8 previous year in which such asset is
years acquired, the total amount of deduction so
claimed and allowed in any previous year(s)
in respect of such asset, as reduced by the
amount of depreciation allowable in
accordance with the provisions of section
32 as if no deduction had been allowed u/s
35AD, shall be deemed to be income of the
assessee chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession” of the
previous year in which the asset is so used.
In such a case, as per the proviso to
Explanation 13 to Section 43(1), the actual
cost of such asset for the assesse shall be
the actual cost as reduced by amount of
depreciation would have been allowable
had the asset been used for the purpose of
business since the date of its acquisition.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Mr. Arnav is a proprietor having two units – Unit A carries on specified business of
setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of sugar; Unit B carries on
non-specified business of operating a warehousing facility for storage of edible oil.
Unit A commenced operations on 1.4.2023 and it claimed deduction of ` 100 lakhs
incurred on purchase of two buildings for ` 50 lakhs each (for operating a warehousing
facility for storage of sugar) under section 35AD for A.Y.2024-25. However, in February,
2025, Unit A transferred one of its buildings to Unit B.
Examine the tax implications of such transfer in the hands of Mr. Arnav.
SOLUTION
Since the capital asset, in respect of which deduction of ` 50 lakhs was claimed
u/s 35AD, has been transferred by Unit A carrying on specified business to Unit B
carrying on non-specified business in the P.Y.2024-25, the deeming provision u/s
35AD(7B) is attracted during the A.Y.2025-26.
Particulars
`
Deduction allowed u/s 35AD for A.Y.2024-25 50,00,000
Less: Depreciation allowable u/s 32 for A.Y.2024-25 [10% of ` 50 lakhs] 5,00,000
Deemed income under section 35AD(7B) 45,00,000
Mr. Arnav, however, by virtue of proviso to Explanation 13 to section 43(1), can
claim depreciation u/s 32 on the building in Unit B for A.Y.2025-26. For the
purpose of claiming depreciation on building in Unit B, the actual cost of the
building would be:
Particulars
`
Actual cost to the assessee 50,00,000
Less: Depreciation allowable u/s 32 for A.Y.2024-25 [10% of ` 50 lakhs] 5,00,000
Actual cost in the hands of Mr. Arnav in respect of building in its 45,00,000
Unit B
(vi) Amortisation of Preliminary Expenses [Section 35D]
(1) Nature of expenditure: Section 35D provides for the amortisation of
preliminary expenses incurred by Indian companies and other resident non-
corporate taxpayers for the establishment of business concerns or the
expansion of the business of existing concerns.
(2) Applicable: This section applies
(a) only to Indian companies and resident non-corporate assessees;
(b) in the case of new companies to expenses incurred before the
commencement of the business;
(c) in the case of extension of an existing undertaking to expenses
incurred till the extension is completed, i.e., in the case of the setting
up of a new unit - expenses incurred till the new unit commences
production or operation.
(3) Amount eligible for deduction: Such preliminary expenditure incurred
shall be amortised over a period of 5 years. In other words, 1/5th of such
expenditure is allowable as a deduction for each of the five successive
previous years beginning with the previous year in which the business
commences or, the previous year in which the extension of the undertaking
is completed or the new unit commences production or operation, as the
case may be.
(4) Eligible expenses - The following expenditure are eligible for amortisation:
(i) Expenditure in connection with–
(a) the preparation of feasibility report
(b) the preparation of project report;
(c) conducting market survey or any other survey necessary for the
business of the assessee;
(d) engineering services relating to the assessee’s business;
The assessee has to furnish a statement containing the particulars of
above expenditure within prescribed period to the prescribed income-
tax authority in the prescribed form and manner.
Accordingly, Rule 6ABBB prescribes that the statement containing
particulars of above specified expenditure is required to be furnished
one month prior to the due date for furnishing the return of income as
specified under section 139(1).
(ii) legal charges for drafting any agreement between the assessee and
any other person for any purpose relating to the setting up to conduct
the business of assessee.
(iii) Where the assessee is a company, in addition to the above,
expenditure incurred –
(a) by way of legal charges for drafting the Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the company;
(b) on printing the Memorandum and Articles of Association;
(c) by way of fees for registering the company under the Companies
Act; 19566,
(d) in connection with the issue, for public subscription, of the
shares in or debentures of the company, being underwriting
commission, brokerage and charges for drafting, printing and
advertisement of the prospectus; and
(iv) Such other items of expenditure (not being expenditure qualifying for
any allowance or deduction under any other provision of the Act) as
may be prescribed by the Board for the purpose of amortisation.
However, the Board, so far, has not prescribed any specific item of
expense as qualifying for amortisation under this clause.
(5) Overall Limits - The maximum aggregate amount of the qualifying
expenses that can be amortised has been fixed at 5% of the cost of the
project or in the case of an Indian company, at the option of the company,
5% of the capital employed in the business of the company, whichever is
higher. The excess, if any, of the qualifying expenses shall be ignored.
Amount of
•5% of cost of
•5% of the cost of deduction
project
the project •1/5th of
OR
qualifying
•5% of capital
In case of resident limit for each employed
of the five
non-corporate
assessees successive In case of Indian
years
companies
(6) Meaning of certain terms:
Terms Meaning
Cost of (i) Expenses incurred before the commencement of
the business: the actual cost of the fixed assets, being land,
project buildings, leaseholds, plant, machinery, furniture,
fittings, railway sidings (including expenditure on the
development of land, buildings) which are shown in the
6 Now Companies Act, 2013
higher
Whichever
is
books of the assessee as on the last day of the previous
year in which the business of the assessee commences;
(ii) Expenses incurred for extension of the business or
setting up of a new unit: the cost of the fixed assets
being land, buildings, leaseholds, plant, machinery,
furniture, fittings, and railway sidings (including
expenditure on the development of land and buildings)
which are shown in the books of the assessee as on the
last day of the previous year in which the extension of
the undertaking is completed or, as the case may be,
the new unit commences production or operation, in so
far as such assets have been acquired or developed in
connection with the extension of the undertaking or the
setting up of the new unit.
Capital (i) In the case of new company: the aggregate of the
employed issued share capital, debentures and long-term
in the borrowings as on the last day of the previous year in
business which the business of the company commences;
of the (ii) in the case of extension of the business or the
company setting up of a new unit: the aggregate of the issued
share capital, debentures, and long-term borrowings as
on the last day of the previous year in which the
extension of the undertaking is completed or, as the
case may be, the unit commences production or
operation in so far as such capital, debentures and long-
term borrowings have been issued or obtained in
connection with the extension of the undertaking or the
setting up of the new undertaking or the setting up of
the new unit of the company.
(7) Audit of accounts: In cases where the assessee is a person other than a
company or a co-operative society, the deduction would be allowable only
if the accounts of the assessee for the year or years in which the
expenditure is incurred have been audited by a Chartered Accountant
before the date specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due
date for furnishing return of income u/s 139(1); and the assessee has, by
that date, furnished for the first year in which the deduction is claimed, the
report of such audit in the prescribed form duly signed and verified by the
auditor and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.
Particulars Due date of filing of Specified Date
return
Assessees (other 31st October of the 30th September of the
than a company) relevant A.Y. relevant A.Y.
subject to tax
For A.Y.2025-26, on or For A.Y.2025-26, on or
audit before 31st October, 2025 before 30th September, 2025
(8) No other deduction under any provision of the Act: It has been clarified
that in case where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for
any assessment year in respect of any item of expenditure, the expenditure
in respect of which deduction is so allowed shall not qualify for deduction
under any other provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment
year.
(vii) Amortisation of expenditure incurred under voluntary retirement
scheme [Section 35DDA]:
(1) Nature of expenditure: This section applies to an assessee who has
incurred expenditure in any previous year in the form of payment to any
employee in connection with his voluntary retirement, in accordance with
any scheme or schemes of voluntary retirement.
(2) Amount of deduction: The amount of deduction allowable is one-fifth of
the amount paid for that previous year, and the balance in four equal
installments in the four immediately succeeding previous years.
(3) No deduction under any other provision of the Act: No deduction shall be
allowed in respect of the above expenditure under any other provision of the
Act.
(viii) Other Deductions [Section 36]
This section authorises deduction of certain specific expenses. The items of
expenditure and the conditions under which such expenditures are deductible
are:
(1) Insurance premia paid [Section 36(1)(i)] - If insurance policy has been
taken out against risk, damage or destruction of the stock or stores used for
the business or profession, the premia paid is deductible. But the premium
in respect of any insurance undertaken for any other purpose is not
allowable under the clause.
(2) Premia paid by employer for health insurance of employees [Section
36(1)(ib)] - This clause seeks to allow a deduction to an employer in respect of
premia paid by him by any mode of payment other than cash to effect or to
keep in force an insurance on the health of his employees in accordance with a
scheme framed by
(i) the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the
Central Government; or
(ii) any other insurer and approved by the IRDA.
(3) Bonus and Commission [Section 36(1)(ii)] - These are deductible in full
provided the sum paid to the employees as bonus or commission shall not
be payable to them as profits or dividends if it had not been paid as bonus
or commission.
It is a provision intended to safeguard against a private company or an
association escaping tax by distributing a part of its profits by way of bonus
amongst the members, or employees of their own concern instead of
distributing the money as dividends or profits.
(4) Interest on borrowed capital [Section 36(1)(iii)] - Deduction of interest is
allowed in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes of business or
profession in the computation of income under the head "Profits and gains
of business or profession".
Capital may be borrowed for several purposes like for acquiring a capital
asset, or to pay off a trading debt or loss etc. The scope of the expression
‘for the purposes of business’ is very wide. Capital may be borrowed in the
course of the existing business as well as for acquiring assets for extension
of existing business.
As per proviso to section 36(1)(iii), deduction in respect of any amount of
interest paid, in respect of capital borrowed for acquisition of new asset
(whether capitalised in the books of account or not) for any period
beginning from the date on which the capital was borrowed for acquisition
of the asset till the date on which such asset was first put to use shall not be
allowed.
Explanation 8 to section 43(1) clarifies that interest relatable to a period
after the asset is first put to use cannot be capitalised. Interest in respect of
capital borrowed for any period from the date of borrowing to the date on
which the asset was first put to use should, therefore, be capitalised.
Interest on borrowing for acquisition of new
capital asset for business or profession
Interest from the date of borrowing
Interest for the period after such
till the date on which such asset was
asset is first put to use
first put to use
Includible in the actual cost of Allowable as deduction while
the asset [to be capitalised] computing business income
(5) Discount on Zero Coupon Bonds (ZCBs) [Section 36(1)(iiia)] - Section
36(1)(iiia) provides deduction for the discount on ZCB on pro rata basis
having regard to the period of life of the bond to be calculated in the
manner prescribed.
Term Meaning
Discount Difference of the amount received or receivable by an
infrastructure capital company/ infrastructure capital
fund/ public sector company/ scheduled bank on issue of
the bond and the amount payable by such company or
fund or bank on maturity or redemption of the bond.
Period of The period commencing from the date of issue of the
life of the bond and ending on the date of the maturity or
bond redemption.
(6) Contributions to provident and other funds [Section 36(1)(iv) and (v)] -
Contribution to the employees’ recognised provident fund/approved
superannuation fund is allowable subject to the limits laid down for the
purpose of recognizing the provident fund or approving superannuation
fund.
Contribution to an approved gratuity fund is allowable subject to the
condition that the gratuity fund should be for exclusive benefit of the
employees under an irrevocable trust.
(7) Employer’s contribution to the account of the employee under a
Pension Scheme referred to in section 80CCD [Section 36(1)(iva)]
(i) Section 36(1)(iva) to provide that the employer’s contribution to the
account of an employee under a Pension Scheme as referred to in
section 80CCD would be allowed as deduction while computing
business income.
(ii) However, deduction would be restricted to 14% of salary of the
employee in the previous year.
(iii) Salary, for this purpose, includes dearness allowance, if the terms of
employment so provide, but excludes all other allowances and
perquisites.
(8) Amount received by an assessee-employer as contribution from his
employees towards their welfare fund to be allowed only if such
amount is credited on or before due date under the relevant Act, Rule
etc. – Section 36(1)(va) and section 57(ia) provide that deduction in respect
of any sum received by the taxpayer as contribution from his employees
towards any welfare fund of such employees will be allowed only if such
sum is credited by the taxpayer to the employee’s account in the relevant
fund on or before the due date.
Due date The date by which the assessee is required as an employer to
credit such contribution to the employee’s account in the
relevant fund under the provisions of any law on term of
contract of service or otherwise.
As per the Employees Provident Funds Scheme, 1952, the amounts under
consideration in respect of wages of the employees for any particular month
shall be paid within 15 days of the close of every month.
Note - It is clarified that the provisions of section 43B regarding allowability
of certain expenditure in a previous year only on actual payment basis on or
before due date of filing of return of income for relevant assessment year,
does not apply and would deemed never to be applied on employee’s
contribution received by employer towards any welfare fund of such
employee. In effect, the extended time upto due date of filing of return for
is not available for credit of employees contribution towards any welfare
fund received by the employer.
(9) Bad debts [Section 36(1)(vii) and section 36(2)] – These can be deducted
subject to the following conditions:
(a) The debts or loans should be in respect of a business which was
carried on by the assessee during the relevant previous year.
(b) The debt should have been taken into account in computing the
income of the assessee of the previous year in which such debt is
written off or of an earlier previous year or should represent money
lent by the assessee in the ordinary course of his business of banking
or money lending.
I. Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of
the assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs7 to be allowed as
deduction in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof
becomes irrecoverable [Section 36(1)(vii)]
(i) Under section 36(1)(vii), deduction is allowed in respect of the
amount of any bad debt or part thereof which is written off as
irrecoverable in the accounts of the assessee for the previous year.
(ii) Therefore, write off in the books of account is an essential
condition for claim of bad debts under section 36(1)(vii).
(iii) Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of the
assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs to be allowed as deduction
in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof becomes
irrecoverable.
If a debt, which has not been recognized in the books of account as
per the requirement of the accounting standards but has been taken
into account in the computation of income as per the notified ICDSs,
has become irrecoverable, it can still be claimed as bad debt under
section 36(1)(vii) since it shall be deemed that the debt has been
written off as irrecoverable in the books of account by virtue of
the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii). This is because some ICDSs
7 Income Computation Disclosure Standards (ICDSs) will be discussed at Final level.
require recognition of income at an earlier point of time (prior to the
point of time such income is recognised in the books of account).
Consequently, if the whole or part of such income recognised at an
earlier point of time for tax purposes becomes irrecoverable, it can be
claimed as bad debts on account of the second proviso to section
36(1)(vii).
Where the amount of such debt or part thereof has been taken into account in
computing the income of the assessee (on the basis of ICDSs without
recording the same in the accounts)
of the previous year in which such or
of an earlier previous year
debt has become irrecoverable
Such debt or part thereof shall be allowedin the previous year in which such
debt or part thereof becomes irrecoverable
and
It shall be deemed that such debt or part thereof has been written off as
irrecoverable in the accounts
II. Deduction of differential amount of debts due as bad debts in the
year of recovery, to the extent of deficiency in recovery
If, on the final settlement, the amount recovered in respect of any
debt, where deduction had already been allowed, falls short of the
difference between the debt due and the amount of debt allowed, the
deficiency can be claimed as a deduction from the income of the
previous year in which the ultimate recovery out of the debt is made.
It is permissible for the Assessing Officer to allow deduction in respect
of a bad debt or any part thereof in the assessment of a particular
year and subsequently to allow the balance of the amount, if any, in
the year in which the ultimate recovery is made, that is to say, when
the final result of the process of recovery comes to be known.
Recovery of a bad debt subsequently [Section 41(4)] - If a deduction
has been allowed in respect of a bad debt under section 36, and
subsequently the amount recovered in respect of such debt is more than
the amount due after the allowance had been made, the excess shall be
deemed to be the profits and gains of business or profession and will be
chargeable as income of the previous year in which it is recovered,
whether or not the business or profession in respect of which the
deduction has been allowed is in existence at the time.
(10) Expenses on family planning by a company [Section 36(1)(ix)] - Any
expenditure of revenue nature bona fide incurred by a company for the
purpose of promoting family planning amongst its employees will be
allowed as a deduction in computing the company’s business income:
• Where the expenditure is of a capital nature, one-fifth of such
expenditure will be deducted in the previous year in which it was incurred
and in each of the four immediately succeeding previous years.
• This deduction is allowable only to companies and not to other
assessees.
• The assessee would be entitled to carry forward and set off the
unabsorbed part of the allowance in the same way as unabsorbed
depreciation.
The capital expenditure on promoting family planning will be treated in the
same way as capital expenditure for scientific research for purposes of
dealing with the profit or loss on the sale or transfer of the asset including a
transfer on amalgamation.
An individual carrying on business or profession will not be
allowed deduction of expenses incurred on promoting family
planning amongst its employees.
(11) Deduction of securities transaction tax paid [Section 36(1)(xv)] - The
amount of securities transaction tax paid by the assessee during the year in
respect of taxable securities transactions entered into in the course of
business shall be allowed as deduction under section 36 subject to the
condition that such income from taxable securities transactions is included
under the head ‘Profits and gains of business or profession’.
Thus, securities transaction tax paid would be allowed as a deduction like
any other business expenditure.
(12) Deduction for commodities transaction tax paid in respect of taxable
commodities transactions [Section 36(1)(xvi)]
(a) Section 36(1)(xvi) provides that an amount equal to the CTT paid by
the assessee in respect of the taxable commodities transactions
entered into in the course of his business during the previous year
shall be allowable as deduction, if the income arising from such
taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(b) A ‘taxable commodities transaction’ means a transaction of sale of
commodity derivatives or sale of commodity derivatives based on
prices or indices of prices of commodity derivatives or option on
commodity derivatives or option in goods in respect of commodities,
other than agricultural commodities, traded in recognised stock
exchange.
(c) A “commodity derivative” means –
(1) A contract for delivery of goods which is not a ready delivery
contract
(2) A contract for differences which derives its value from prices or
indices of prices -
(i) of such underlying goods; or
(ii) of related services and rights, such as warehousing and
freight; or
(iii) with reference to weather and similar events and activities
having a bearing on the commodity sector.
(ix) Residuary Expenses [Section 37]
(1) Revenue expenditure incurred for purposes of carrying on the business,
profession or vocation - This is a residuary section under which only
business expenditure is allowable but not the business losses, e.g., those
arising out of embezzlement, theft, destruction of assets, misappropriation
by employees etc. The deduction is limited only to the amount actually
expended and does not extend to a reserve created against a contingent
liability.
(2) Conditions for allowance: The following conditions should be fulfilled in
order that a particular item of expenditure may be deductible under this
section:
(a) The expenditure should not be of the nature described in sections 30
to 36.
(b) It should have been incurred by the assessee in the accounting year.
(c) It should be in respect of a business carried on by the assessee the
profits of which are being computed and assessed.
(d) It must have been incurred after the business was set up.
(e) It should not be in the nature of any personal expenses of the
assessee.
(f) It should have been laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for
the purposes of such business.
(g) It should not be in the nature of capital expenditure.
(h) The expenditure should not have been incurred by the assessee for
any purpose which is an offence or is prohibited by law.
This section is thus limited in scope. It does not permit an assessee to make
all deductions which a prudent trader would make in ascertaining his own
profit. It might be observed that the section requires that the expenditure
should be wholly and exclusively laid out for purpose of the business but
not that it should have been necessarily laid out for such purpose.
Therefore, expenses wholly and exclusively laid out for the purpose of trade
are, subject to the fulfilment of other conditions, allowed under this section
even though the outlay is unnecessary.
(3) Expenditure incurred on Keyman insurance policy: CBDT Circular no.
762/1998 dated 18.02.1998 clarifies that the premium paid on the Keyman
Insurance Policy is allowable as business expenditure.
The Punjab and Haryana High Court held that, “the Keyman Insurance Policy
when obtained to secure the life of a partner to safeguard the firm against a
disruption of the business is equally for the benefit of the partnership
business which may be effected as a result of premature death of a partner.
Thus, the premium on the Keyman Insurance Policy of partner of the firm is
wholly and exclusively for the purpose of business and is allowable as
business expenditure”.
The CBDT accepted the view of the High Court, accordingly, vide Circular
no. 38/2016 has clarified that, in case of a firm, premium paid by the firm on
the Keyman Insurance Policy of a partner, to safeguard the firm against a
disruption of the business, is an admissible expenditure under section 37.
(4) Explanation 1 to section 37(1) - This Explanation provides that any
expenditure incurred by the assessee for any purpose which is an offence or
which is prohibited by law shall not be allowed as a deduction or allowance.
(5) Explanation 3 to section 37(1) – It is clarified that the expression
“expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is an offence or
which is prohibited by law” in (4) above would include and would be
deemed to have always included the expenditure incurred by an assessee, -
(i) for any purpose which is an offence under any law for the time being
in force, in India or outside India or which is prohibited by any law for
the time being in force, in India or outside India; or
(ii) to provide any benefit or perquisite, in whatever form, to a person,
whether or not carrying on a business or exercising a profession, and
acceptance of such benefit or perquisite by such person is in violation
of any law or rule or regulation or guidelines, as the case may be, for
the time being in force, governing the conduct of such person; or
(iii) to compound an offence under any law for the time being in force, in
India or outside India; or
(iv) to settle proceedings initiated in relation to contravention under such
law as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
For eg: expenses incurred in providing freebies to medical practitioner by
pharmaceutical and allied health sector industry are in violation of the
provisions of Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and
Ethics) Regulations. Hence, such expenditure is considered to be expenses
prohibited by the law and not allowed in the hands of such pharmaceutical
or allied health sector industry or other assessee which has provided
aforesaid freebies.
(6) Disallowance of CSR expenditure [Explanation 2 to Section 37(1)]
(i) Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 read with Schedule VII
thereto and Companies (Corporate Social Responsibility) Rules, 2014
are the special provisions under the company law regime imposing
mandatory CSR obligations in respect of companies having net
worth/turnover/net profit exceeding specified threshold limits. Such
companies have to spend a specified percentage of their average net
profits on CSR activities.
(ii) Under section 37(1), only expenditure, not covered under sections 30
to 36, and incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the
business is allowed as a deduction while computing taxable business
income. The issue under consideration is whether CSR expenditure is
allowable as deduction under section 37.
(iii) It has been clarified that for the purposes of section 37(1), any
expenditure incurred by an assessee on the activities relating to CSR
referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall not be
deemed to have been incurred for the purpose of business and hence,
shall not be allowed as deduction under section 37.
(iv) The rationale behind the disallowance is that CSR expenditure, being
an application of income, is not incurred wholly and exclusively for the
purposes of carrying on business.
(v) However, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance (No.2) Bill,
2014 clarifies that CSR expenditure, which is of the nature described in
sections 30 to 36, shall be allowed as deduction under those sections
subject to fulfillment of conditions, if any, specified therein.
(7) Advertisements in souvenirs of political parties: Section 37(2B) disallows
any deduction on account of advertisement expenses representing
contributions made by any person carrying on business or profession in
computing the profits and gains of the business or profession. It has
specifically been provided that this provision for disallowance would apply
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 37(1).
In other words, the expenditure representing contribution for political
purposes would become disallowable even in those cases where the
expenditure is otherwise incurred by the assessee in his character as a
trader and the amount is wholly and exclusively incurred for the purpose of
the business.
Accordingly, a taxpayer would not be entitled to any deduction in respect of
expenses incurred by him on advertisement in any souvenir, brochure, tract
or the like published by any political party, whether it is registered with the
Election Commission of India or not.
3.7 INADMISSIBLE DEDUCTIONS [SECTION 40]
By dividing the assessees into distinct groups, this section places absolute
restraint on the deductibility of certain expenses as follows:
In the case of any assessee, the following expenses are not deductible:
(1) Section 40(a)(i)
Any interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum chargeable under
this Act, which is payable, -
(a) outside India;
(b) in India to a non-resident non-corporate or to a foreign company,
on which tax is deductible at source under Chapter XVIIB and such tax has not
been deducted or, after deduction, has not been paid on or before the due date
of filing of return specified under section 139(1).
It is also provided that where in respect of any such sum, where tax has been
deducted in any subsequent year, or has been deducted in the previous year but
paid after the due date of filing of return under section 139(1), such sum shall be
allowed as a deduction in computing the income of the previous year in which
such tax has been paid.
In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but
is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by
reason that such payee –
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of
income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,
and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such
form as may be prescribed,
it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum
on the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.
Since the date of furnishing the return of income by the payee is taken to be the
date on which the payer has deducted tax at source and paid the same, such
expenditure/payment in respect of which the payer has failed to deduct tax at
source shall be disallowed under section 40(a)(i) in the year in which the said
expenditure is incurred. However, such expenditure will be allowed as deduction
in the subsequent year in which the return of income is furnished by the payee,
since tax is deemed to have been deducted and paid by the payer in that year.
(2) Section 40(a)(ia)
Section 40(a)(ia) provides that 30% of any sum payable to a resident, on which
tax is deductible at source under Chapter XVII-B, shall be disallowed if –
(i) such tax has not been deducted; or
(ii) such tax, after deduction, has not been paid on or before the due date
specified in section 139(1).
If in respect of such sum, tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or has
been deducted during the previous year but paid after the due date specified in
section 139(1), 30% of such sum shall be allowed as deduction in computing the
income of the previous year in which such tax has been paid.
In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such sum but is
not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to section 201(1) by reason
that such payee –
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return of
income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of income,
and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in such
form as may be prescribed,
it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on such sum.
The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be
the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.
Since the date of furnishing the return of income by the payee is taken to be the
date on which the payer has deducted tax at source and paid the same, 30% of
such expenditure/payment in respect of which the payer has failed to deduct tax
at source shall be disallowed under section 40(a)(ia) in the year in which the said
expenditure is incurred. However, 30% of such expenditure will be allowed as
deduction in the subsequent year in which the return of income is furnished by
the payee, since tax is deemed to have been deducted and paid by the payer in
that year.
Example: Tax on royalty paid to Mr. A, a resident, has been deducted during the
previous year 2024-25, the same has to be paid by 31st July/ 31st October, 2025, as
the case may be. Otherwise, 30% of royalty paid would be disallowed in computing
the income for A.Y.2025-26. If in respect of such royalty, tax deducted during the
P.Y.2024-25 has been paid after 31st July/31st October, 2025, 30% of such royalty,
disallowed in A.Y.2025-26, would be allowed as deduction in the year of payment,
i.e., A.Y.2026-27.
Note - Students are advised to read Chapter 7 on “Advance tax, tax deduction at
source and tax collection at source” before solving this illustration.
ILLUSTRATION 9
Delta Ltd. credited the following amounts to the account of resident payees in the
month of March, 2025 without deduction of tax at source. What would be the
consequence of non-deduction of tax at source by Delta Ltd. on these amounts during
the financial year 2024-25, assuming that the resident payees in all the cases
mentioned below, have not paid the tax, if any, which was required to be deducted by
Delta Ltd.?
Particulars Amount in `
(1) Salary to its employee, Mr. X (credited and paid in March, 12,00,000
2025)
(2) Directors’ remuneration (credited in March, 2025 and paid 28,000
in April, 2025)
Would your answer change if Delta Ltd. has deducted tax on directors’ remuneration in
April, 2025 at the time of payment and remitted the same in July, 2025?
SOLUTION
Non-deduction of tax at source on any sum payable to a resident on which tax is
deductible at source as per the provisions of Chapter XVII-B would attract
disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia).
Therefore, non-deduction of tax at source on any sum paid by way of salary on
which tax is deductible u/s 192 or any sum credited or paid by way of directors’
remuneration on which tax is deductible u/s 194J, would attract
disallowance@30% u/s 40(a)(ia). Whereas in case of salary, tax has to be deducted
u/s 192 at the time of payment, in case of directors’ remuneration, tax has to be
deducted at the time of credit of such sum to the account of the payee or at the
time of payment, whichever is earlier. Therefore, in both the cases i.e., salary and
directors’ remuneration, tax is deductible in the P.Y.2024-25, since salary was paid
in that year and directors’ remuneration was credited in that year. Therefore, the
amount to be disallowed u/s 40(a)(ia) while computing business income for
A.Y.2025-26 is as follows –
Particulars Amount Disallowance u/s
paid in ` 40(a)(ia) @30%
(1) Salary 12,00,000 3,60,000
[tax is deductible under section 192]
(2) Directors’ remuneration 28,000 8,400
[tax is deductible under section 194J
without any threshold limit]
Disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) 3,68,400
If the tax is deducted on directors’ remuneration in the next year i.e., P.Y.2025-26 at
the time of payment and remitted to the Government, the amount of ` 8,400 would
be allowed as deduction while computing the business income of A.Y. 2026-27.
Disallowance of any sum paid to a resident at any time during the previous
year without deduction of tax under section 40(a)(ia) [Circular No.10/2013,
dated 16.12.2013]
There have been conflicting interpretations by judicial authorities regarding the
applicability of provisions of section 40(a)(ia), with regard to the amount not
deductible in computing the income chargeable under the head ‘Profits and gains
of business or profession’. Some court rulings have held that the provisions of
disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) apply only to the amount which remained
payable at the end of the relevant financial year and would not be invoked to
disallow the amount which had actually been paid during the previous year
without deduction of tax at source.
Departmental View: The CBDT’s view is that the provisions of section 40(a)(ia) would
cover not only the amounts which are payable as on 31st March of a previous year
but also amounts which are payable at any time during the year. The statutory
provisions are amply clear and in the context of section 40(a)(ia), the term "payable"
would include "amounts which are paid during the previous year".
ILLUSTRATION 10
During the financial year 2024-25, the following payments/expenditure were made/
incurred by Mr. Raja, a resident individual (whose turnover during the year ended
31.3.2024 was ` 99 lakhs):
(i) Interest of ` 45,000 was paid to Rehman & Co., a resident partnership firm,
without deduction of tax at source;
(ii) ` 10,00,000 was paid as salary to a resident individual without deduction of
tax at source;
(iii) Commission of ` 16,000 was paid to Mr. Vidyasagar, a resident, on 2.7.2024
without deduction of tax at source.
Briefly discuss whether any disallowance arises under the provisions of section
40(a)(ia) assuming that the payees in all the cases mentioned above, have not paid
the tax, if any, which was required to be deducted by Mr. Raja?
SOLUTION
Disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is attracted
where the assessee fails to deduct tax at source as is required under the Act, or
having deducted tax at source, fails to remit the same to the credit of the Central
Government within the stipulated time limit.
(i) The obligation to deduct tax at source from interest paid to a resident arises
u/s 194A in the case of an individual, whose total turnover in the
immediately preceding P.Y., i.e., P.Y.2023-24 exceeds ` 1 crore. Thus, in
present case, since the turnover of the assessee is less than ` 1 crore, he is
not liable to deduct tax at source. Hence, disallowance u/s 40(a)(ia) is not
attracted in this case.
(ii) The disallowance of 30% of the sums payable under section 40(a)(ia) would be
attracted in respect of all sums on which tax is deductible under Chapter XVII-
B. Section 192, which requires deduction of tax at source from salary paid, is
covered under Chapter XVII-B. The obligation to deduct tax at source under
section 192 arises, in the hands all assessee-employer even if the turnover
amount does not exceed ` 1 crore in the immediately preceding previous year.
Therefore, in the present case, the disallowance under section 40(a)(ia) is
attracted for failure to deduct tax at source under section 192 from salary
payment. However, only 30% of the amount of salary paid without
deduction of tax at source would be disallowed.
(iii) The obligation to deduct tax at source under section 194H from commission
paid in excess of ` 15,000 to a resident arises in the case of an individual,
whose total turnover in the immediately preceding previous year, i.e.,
P.Y.2023-24 exceeds ` 1 crore. Thus, in present case, since the turnover of
the assessee is less than ` 1 crore, he is not liable to deduct tax at source
u/s 194H. Mr. Raja is not required to deduct tax at source u/s 194M also
since the aggregate of such commission to Mr. Vidyasagar does not exceed
` 50 lakh during the P.Y. 2024-25. Therefore, disallowance under section
40(a)(ia) is not attracted in this case.
(3) Section 40(a)(ii)
Any sum paid on account of any rate or tax levied on profits on the basis of or in
proportion to the profits and gains of any business or profession.
It is clarified that the term “tax” would include and would be deemed to have
always included any surcharge or cess on such tax. Hence, tax including surcharge
and cess would be disallowed while computing business income [Explanation 3 to
section 40(a)(ii)].
(4) Section 40(a)(iii)
Any sum which is chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’ if it is payable outside
India or to a non-resident and if the tax has not been paid thereon nor deducted
therefrom under Chapter XVII-B.
(5) Section 40(a)(iv)
Any contribution to a provident fund or the fund established for the benefit of
employees of the assessee, unless the assessee has made effective arrangements
to make sure that tax shall be deducted at source from any payments made from
the fund which are chargeable to tax under the head ‘Salaries’.
(6) Section 40(a)(v)
Tax paid on perquisites on behalf of employees is not deductible - In case of
an employee, deriving income in the nature of perquisites (other than monetary
payments), the amount of tax on such income paid by his employer is exempt
from tax in the hands of that employee.
Correspondingly, such payment is not allowed as deduction from the income of
the employer. Thus, the payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites by an
employer on behalf of employee will be exempt from tax in the hands of
employee but will not be allowable as deduction in the hands of the employer.
In the case of any firm assessable as such or a limited liability partnership
(LLP), the following amounts shall not be deducted in computing the
business income
Section 40(b)
(1) Remuneration to non-working partner - Any salary, bonus, commission,
remuneration by whatever name called, to any partner who is not a working
partner. (In the following discussion, the term ‘remuneration’ is applied to
denote payments in the nature of salary, bonus, commission);
(2) Remuneration to a working partner not authorized by deed - Any
remuneration paid to the working partner or interest to any partner which is not
authorised by or which is inconsistent with the terms of the partnership deed;
(3) Remuneration to a working partner or interest to a partner authorized
by deed but relates to an earlier period - It is possible that the current
partnership deed may authorise payments of remuneration to any working
partner or interest to any partner for a period which is prior to the date of the
current partnership deed. The approval by the current partnership deed might
have been necessitated due to the fact that such payment was not authorised
by or was inconsistent with the earlier partnership deed. Such payments of
remuneration or interest will also be disallowed. However, it should be noted
that the current partnership deed cannot authorise any payment which relates
to a period prior to the date of earlier partnership deed.
Next, by virtue of a further restriction contained in section 40(b)(iii), such
remuneration paid to the working partners will be allowed as deduction to the
firm from the date of such partnership deed and not for any period prior thereto.
Example: If a firm incorporates the clause relating to payment of
remuneration to the working partners, by executing an appropriate deed, say,
on July 1, 2024 but effective from April 1, 2024, the firm would get deduction
for the remuneration paid to its working partners from July 1, 2024 onwards,
but not for the period from April 1 to June 30. It will not be possible to give
retrospective effect to oral agreements entered into vis a vis such
remuneration prior to putting the same in a written partnership deed.
(4) Interest to any partner in excess of 12% p.a.- Any interest payment
authorised by the partnership deed falling after the date of such deed to
the extent such interest exceeds 12% simple interest p.a.
(5) Remuneration to a working partner in excess of prescribed limits - Any
remuneration paid to a working partner, authorised by a partnership deed
and falling after the date of the deed in excess of the following limits:
Book Profit Quantum of deduction
On the first ` 6 lakh of book ` 3,00,000 or 90% of book profit,
profit or in case of loss whichever is higher
On the balance of book profit 60% of book profit
(6) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
Book Profit The net profit as shown in the profit and loss account for
the relevant previous year computed in accordance with
the provisions for computing income from profits and
gains [Explanation 3 to section 40(b)].
The above amount should be increased by the
remuneration paid or payable to all the partners of the
firm if the same has been deducted while computing the
net profit.
Working An individual who is actively engaged in conducting the
partner affairs of the business or profession of the firm of which
he is a partner [Explanation 4 to section 40(b)]
ILLUSTRATION 11
A firm has paid ` 8,50,000 as remuneration to its partners for the
P.Y.2024-25, in accordance with its partnership deed, and it has a book profit
of ` 10 lakhs. What is the remuneration allowable as deduction?
SOLUTION
The allowable remuneration calculated as per the limits specified in section
40(b)(v) would be –
Particulars
`
On first ` 6 lakh of book profit [` 6,00,000 × 90%] 5,40,000
On balance ` 4 lakh of book profit [` 4,00,000 × 60%] 2,40,000
7,80,000
The excess amount of ` 70,000 (i.e., ` 8,50,000 – ` 7,80,000) would be
disallowed as per section 40(b)(v).
(7) Explanations to section 40(b)
(1) Where an individual is a partner in a firm in a representative capacity:
(i) interest paid by the firm to such individual otherwise than as
partner in a representative capacity shall not be taken into
account for the purposes of this clause.
(ii) interest paid by the firm to such individual as partner in a
representative capacity and interest paid by the firm to the
person so represented shall be taken into account for the
purposes of this clause [Explanation 1 to section 40(b)]
(2) Where an individual is a partner in a firm otherwise than in a
representative capacity, interest paid to him by the firm shall not be
taken into account if he receives the same on behalf of or for the
benefit of any other person [Explanation 2 to section 40(b)].
Note - Presently, there is no provision for deduction of tax at source on payment of
salary, remuneration, interest, bonus, or commission to partners by the partnership
firm. W.e.f. 1.4.2025, a new section 194T has been introduced by the Finance (No. 2)
Act, 2024 which requires partnership firms to deduct tax at source (TDS) @10% on
any sum paid to partners, such as salary, remuneration, commission, bonus, or
interest. No deduction is required if the sum or aggregate of such sum does not
exceed ` 20,000 during the financial year. Please note that the TDS provision under
section 194T would be effective from 1.4.2025.
ILLUSTRATION 12
Rao & Jain, a partnership firm consisting of two partners, reports a net profit of
` 17,00,000 before deduction of the following items:
(1) Salary of ` 40,000 each per month payable to two working partners of the
firm (as authorized by the deed of partnership).
(2) Depreciation on plant and machinery under section 32 (computed) ` 1,50,000.
(3) Interest on capital at 15% per annum (as per the deed of partnership). The
amount of capital eligible for interest is ` 5,00,000.
Compute:
(i) Book-profit of the firm under section 40(b) of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(ii) Allowable working partner salary for the A.Y. 2025-26 as per section 40(b).
SOLUTION
(i) As per Explanation 3 to section 40(b), “book profit” shall mean the net profit
as per the profit and loss account for the relevant previous year computed
in the manner laid down in Chapter IV-D as increased by the aggregate
amount of the remuneration paid or payable to the partners of the firm if
the same has been already deducted while computing the net profit.
In the present case, the net profit given is before deduction of depreciation
on plant and machinery, interest on capital of partners and salary to the
working partners. Therefore, the book profit shall be as follows:
Computation of Book Profit of the firm under section 40(b)
Particulars
` `
Net Profit (before deduction of depreciation, salary 17,00,000
and interest)
Less: Depreciation under section 32 1,50,000
Interest @ 12% p.a. [being the maximum
allowable as per section 40(b)] (` 5,00,000 60,000 2,10,000
×12%)
Book Profit 14,90,000
(ii) Salary actually paid to working partners = ` 40,000 × 2 × 12 = ` 9,60,000.
As per the provisions of section 40(b)(v), the salary paid to the working
partners is allowed subject to the following limits -
On the first ` 6,00,000 of ` 3,00,000 or 90% of book profit, whichever
book profit or in case of loss is more
On the balance of book profit 60% of the balance book profit
Therefore, the maximum allowable working partners’ salary for the
A.Y. 2025-26 in this case would be:
Particulars
`
On the first ` 6,00,000 of book profit [(` 3,00,000 or 90% of 5,40,000
` 6,00,000) whichever is more]
On the balance of book profit [60% of (` 14,90,000 - 5,34,000
` 6,00,000)]
Maximum allowable partners’ salary 10,74,000
Hence, allowable working partners’ salary for the A.Y.2025-26 as per the
provisions of section 40(b)(v) is ` 9,60,000.
3.8 EXPENSES OR PAYMENT NOT DEDUCTIBLE
IN CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES [SECTION 40A]
(i) Payments to relatives and associates
Section 40A(2) provides that where the assessee incurs any expenditure in respect
of which a payment has been or is to be made to a specified person [See column
(2) of Table below) so much of the expenditure as is considered to be excessive or
unreasonable shall be disallowed by the Assessing Officer. While doing so he shall
have due regard to:
(a) the fair market value of the goods, service of facilities for which the
payment is made; or
(b) the legitimate needs of the business or profession carried on by the assessee; or
(c) the benefit derived by or accruing to the assessee from such a payment.
Assessee Specified Person
(1) (2)
Individual 1. Any relative of the individual assessee
2. Any person who carries on a business or profession, if
• the individual assessee has a substantial interest in the
business of that person or
• any relative of the individual assessee has a substantial
interest in the business of that person
Company, 1. Any director of the company, partner of the firm or member of
Firm, HUF the family or association or any relative of such director, partner
or AOP or member or
2. In case of a company assessee, any individual who has
substantial interest in the business or profession of the
company or any relative of such individual or
3. Any person who carries on a business or profession, in which
the Company/ Firm/ HUF/ AOP or director of the company,
partner of the firm or member of the family or association or
any relative of such director, partner or member has substantial
interest in the business of that person.
All The following are specified persons:
assessees
Person who has Other related persons of such person,
substantial who has a substantial interest in the
interest in the assessee’s business
assessee’s
business
Company/ AOP/ • Any director of such company, partner of
Firm/ HUF such firm or the member of such family
or association or
• any relative of such director, partner or
member or
• Any other company carrying on business
or profession in which the first mentioned
company has a substantial interest
a director, • Company/ Firm/ AOP/ HUF of which he is
partner or a director, partner or member or
member • Any other director/ partner/ member of
the such Company/Firm/ AOP/ HUF or
• Any relative of such director, partner or
member
Relative, in relation to an “individual”, means the spouse, brother or sister
or any lineal ascendant or descendant of that individual [Section 2(41)].
Substantial interest in a business or profession
A person shall be deemed to have a substantial interest in a business or
profession if -
- in a case where the business or profession is carried on by a company,
such person is, at any time during the previous year, the beneficial owner
of equity shares carrying not less than 20% of the voting power and
- in any other case, such person is, at any time during the previous year,
beneficially entitled to not less than 20% of the profits of such business or
profession.
(ii) Payments in excess of ` 10,000 made otherwise than through
prescribed modes
According to section 40A(3), where the assessee incurs any expenditure, in
respect of which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day
otherwise than by an account payee cheque drawn on a bank or by an
account payee bank draft or use of electronic system through bank account
or through such other prescribed electronic modes exceeds ` 10,000, such
expenditure shall not be allowed as a deduction.
The prescribed electronic modes are credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS
(Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time
Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat
Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated
29.01.2020].
The provision applies to all categories of expenditure involving payments for
goods or services which are deductible in computing the taxable income.
Example: If, in respect of an expenditure of ` 32,000 incurred by X Ltd., 4 cash
payments of ` 8,000 are made on a particular day to one Mr. Y – one in the
morning at 10 a.m., one at 12 noon, one at 3 p.m. and one at 6 p.m., the entire
expenditure of ` 32,000 would be disallowed under section 40A(3), since the
aggregate of cash payments made during a day to Mr. Y exceeds ` 10,000.
Payments in excess of ` 10,000 made otherwise than through prescribed
modes deemed to be the income of the subsequent year, if expenditure has
been allowed as deduction in any previous year on due basis:
In case of an assessee following mercantile system of accounting, if an
expenditure has been allowed as deduction in any previous year on due basis,
and payment has been made in a subsequent year otherwise than by account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such
as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National
Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay,
then the payment so made shall be deemed to be the income of the subsequent
year if such payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day
exceeds ` 10,000 [Section 40A(3A)].
Increased limit of ` 35,000 applicable, where payment is made to transport
operator: The limit would be ` 35,000 in case of payment made to transport
operators for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages, otherwise than through
prescribed modes. Therefore, payment or aggregate of payments up to ` 35,000
in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise than by way of account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes such
as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National
Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay. In
all other cases, the limit would continue to be ` 10,000.
Cases where disallowances would not be attracted:
(i) Loan transactions: It does not apply to loan transactions because
advancing of loans or repayments of the principal amount of loan does not
constitute an expenditure deductible in computing the taxable income.
However, interest payments of amounts exceeding ` 10,000 at a time are
required to be made by account payee cheques or drafts or electronic
clearing system or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as
credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT
(National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money)
Aadhar Pay as interest is a deductible expenditure.
(ii) Payment made by commission agents: This requirement does not apply
to payment made by commission agents for goods received by them for
sale on commission or consignment basis because such a payment is not an
expenditure deductible in computing the taxable income of the commission
agent.
For the same reason, this requirement does not apply to advance payment
made by the commission agent to the party concerned against supply of
goods.
However, where commission agent purchases goods on his own account but
not on commission basis, the requirement will apply. The provisions
regarding payments by account payee cheque or draft or electronic clearing
system or through such other prescribed electronic modes such as credit
card, debit card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT
(National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money)
Aadhar Pay apply equally to payments made for goods purchased on credit.
Cases and circumstances in which a payment or aggregate of payments
exceeding ten thousand rupees may be made to a person in a day,
otherwise than by an account payee cheque/ account payee bank draft/
use of ECS through a bank account or through such other electronic
modes prescribed in Rule 6ABBA [Rule 6DD]:
As per this rule, no disallowance under section 40A(3) shall be made and no
payment shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of business or
profession under section 40A(3A) where a payment or aggregate of
payments made to a person in a day, otherwise than by an account payee
cheque drawn on a bank or account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed
electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS
(Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real
Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and
BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay, exceeds ` 10,000 in the
cases and circumstances specified hereunder, namely:
(a) where the payment is made to
(i) the Reserve Bank of India or any banking company;
(ii) the State Bank of India or any subsidiary bank;
(iii) any co-operative bank or land mortgage bank;
(iv) any primary agricultural credit society or any primary credit society;
(v) the Life Insurance Corporation of India;
(b) where the payment is made to the Government and, under the rules
framed by it, such payment is required to be made in legal tender;
(c) where the payment is made by
(i) any letter of credit arrangements through a bank;
(ii) a mail or telegraphic transfer through a bank;
(iii) a book adjustment from any account in a bank to any other
account in that or any other bank;
(iv) a bill of exchange made payable only to a bank;
(d) where the payment is made by way of adjustment against the amount
of any liability incurred by the payee for any goods supplied or
services rendered by the assessee to such payee;
(e) where the payment is made for the purchase of -
(i) agricultural or forest produce; or
(ii) the produce of animal husbandry (including livestock, meat,
hides and skins) or dairy or poultry farming; or
(iii) fish or fish products; or
(iv) the products of horticulture or apiculture,
to the cultivator, grower or producer of such articles, produce or products;
Notes -
(i) The expression ‘fish or fish products’ (iii) above would include
‘other marine products such as shrimp, prawn, cuttlefish, squid,
crab, lobster etc.’.
(ii) The 'producers' of fish or fish products for the purpose of Rule
6DD(e) would include, besides the fishermen, any headman of
fishermen, who sorts the catch of fish brought by fishermen
from the sea, at the sea shore itself and then sells the fish or fish
products to traders, exporters etc.
However, the above exception will not be available on the payment
for the purchase of fish or fish products from a person who is not
proved to be a 'producer' of these goods and is only a trader, broker
or any other middleman, by whatever name called.
(f) where the payment is made for the purchase of the products
manufactured or processed without the aid of power in a cottage
industry, to the producer of such products;
(g) where the payment is made in a village or town, which on the date of
such payment is not served by any bank, to any person who ordinarily
resides, or is carrying on any business, profession or vocation, in any
such village or town;
(h) where any payment is made to an employee of the assessee or the
heir of any such employee, on or in connection with the retirement,
retrenchment, resignation, discharge or death of such employee, on
account of gratuity, retrenchment compensation or similar terminal
benefit and the aggregate of such sums payable to the employee or
his heir does not exceed ` 50,000;
(i) where the payment is made by an assessee by way of salary to his
employee after deducting the income-tax from salary in accordance
with the provisions of section 192 of the Act, and when such
employee-
(i) is temporarily posted for a continuous period of fifteen days or more
in a place other than his normal place of duty or on a ship; and
(ii) does not maintain any account in any bank at such place or ship;
(j) where the payment is made by any person to his agent who is
required to make payment in cash for goods or services on behalf of
such person;
(k) where the payment is made by an authorised dealer or a money
changer against purchase of foreign currency or travelers cheques in
the normal course of his business.
Note: Where any payment in respect of any expenditure is required to be made
by an account payee cheque/account payee bank draft or use of electronic
clearing system through a bank account or through such other prescribed
electronic modes in order that such expenditure may not be disallowed as a
deduction under section 40A(3), then the payment may be made by such cheque
or draft or electronic clearing system or through such other prescribed electronic
modes.
No person is allowed to raise, in any suit or other proceeding, a plea based on the
ground that the payment was not made or tendered in cash or in any other
manner.
This is notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force or in any contract.
(iii) Disallowance of provision for gratuity
Section 40A(7) provides that no deduction would be allowable to any taxpayer
carrying on any business or profession in respect of any provision (whether called
as provision or by any other names) made by him towards the payment of
gratuity to his employers on their retirement or on the termination of their
employment for any reason.
The reason for this disallowance is that, under section 36(1)(v), deduction is
allowable in computing the profits and gains of the business or profession in
respect of any sum paid by a taxpayer in his capacity as an employer in the form
of contributions made by him to an approved gratuity fund created for the
exclusive benefit of his employees under an irrevocable trust. Further, section
37(1) provides that any expenditure other than the expenditure of the nature
described in sections 30 to 36 laid out or expended, wholly and exclusively for the
purpose of the business or profession must be allowed as a deduction in
computing the taxable income from business.
A reading of these two provisions clearly indicates that the intention of the
legislature has always been that the deduction in respect of gratuity be allowable
to the employer either in the year in which the gratuity is actually paid or in the
year in which contributions to an approved gratuity fund are actually made by
employer.
This provision, therefore, makes it clear that any amount claimed by the assessee
towards provision for gratuity, by whatever name called would be disallowable in
the assessment of employer even if the assessee follows the mercantile system of
accounting.
However, no disallowance would be made as per section 40A(7) in the case where
any provision is made by the employer for the purpose of payment of sum by way
of contribution to an approved gratuity fund during the previous year or for the
purpose of making payment of any gratuity that has become payable during the
previous year by virtue of the employee’s retirement, death, termination of service
etc.
Further, where any provision for gratuity for any reason has been allowed as a
deduction to the assessee for any assessment year, any sum paid out of such
provision by way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund or by way to
gratuity to employee shall not be allowed as deduction to the assessee in the year
in which it is paid.
(iv) Contributions by employers to funds, trust etc. [Section 40A(9)]
This sub-section has been introduced to curb the growing practice amongst
employers to claim deductions from taxable profits of the business of
contributions made apparently to the welfare of employees from which, however,
no genuine benefit flows to the employees.
Accordingly, no deduction will be allowed where the assessee pays in his capacity
as an employer, any sum towards setting up or formation of or as contribution to
any fund, trust, company, association of persons, body of individuals, society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or other institution for any
purpose.
However, where such sum is paid in respect of funds covered by sections 36(1)(iv),
36(1)(iva) and 36(1)(v) or any other law, then, the deduction will not be denied.
ILLUSTRATION 13
X Ltd. contributes 20% of basic salary to the account of each employee under a
pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Dearness Allowance is 40% of basic
salary and it forms part of pay of the employees.
Compute the amount of deduction allowable under section 36(1)(iva), if the basic
salary of the employees aggregate to ` 10 lakh. Would disallowance under section
40A(9) be attracted, and if so, to what extent?
SOLUTION
Computation of deduction u/s 36(1)(iva) and disallowance u/s 40A(9)
Particulars `
Basic Salary 10,00,000
Dearness Allowance@40% of basic salary [DA forms part of pay] 4,00,000
Salary for the purpose of section 36(1)(iva) (Basic Salary + DA) 14,00,000
Actual contribution (20% of basic salary i.e., 20% of ` 10 lakh) 2,00,000
Less: Permissible deduction under section 36(1)(iva) (14% of
basic salary plus dearness pay = 14% of ` 14,00,000 = 1,96,000
` 1,96,000)
Excess contribution disallowed under section 40A(9) 4,000
3.9 PROFITS CHARGEABLE TO TAX
[SECTION 41]
This section enumerates certain receipts which are deemed to be income under
the head “business or profession.” Such receipts would attract charge even if the
business from which they arise had ceased to exist prior to the year in which the
liability under this section arises. The particulars of such receipts are given below:
(i) Remission or cessation of trading liability [Section 41(1)]
Suppose an allowance or deduction has been made in any assessment year in
respect of loss, expenditure or trading liability incurred by A. Subsequently, if A
has obtained, whether in cash or in any manner whatsoever, any amount in
respect of such loss or expenditure of some benefit in respect of such trading
liability by way of remission or cessation thereof, the amount obtained by A, or
the value of benefit accruing to him shall be taxed as income of that previous
year. It does not matter whether the business or profession in respect of which
the allowance or deduction has been made is in existence in that year or not.
It is possible that after the above allowance in respect of loss, expenditure, or
trading liability has been given to A, he could have been succeeded in his
business by another person. In such a case, the successor will be liable to be
taxed in respect of any such benefit received by him during a subsequent
previous year.
Successor in business:
(i) Where there has been an amalgamation of a company with another
company, the successor will be the amalgamated company.
(ii) Where a firm carrying on a business or profession is succeeded by another
firm, the successor will be the other firm.
(iii) In any other case, where one person is succeeded by any other person in
that business or profession, the other person will be the successor.
(iv) In case of a demerger, the successor will be the resulting company.
Remission or cessation of a trading liability includes remission or cessation of
liability by a unilateral act of the assessee by way of writing off such liability in his
accounts.
(ii) Balancing charge, Sale of capital asset used for scientific research,
Recovery of a bad debt subsequently etc. [Section 41(2),(3) & (4)]
The provisions of section 41(2) relating to balancing charge, of section 41(3)
relating to assets acquired for scientific research and of section 41(4) dealing with
recovery of bad debts have been dealt with earlier under the respective items.
(iii) Brought forward losses of defunct business [Section 41(5)]
In cases where a receipt is deemed to be profit of a business under section 41
relating to a business that had ceased to exist and there is an unabsorbed loss,
not being a speculation loss, which arose in that business during the previous
year in which it had ceased to exist and which has not been set off, it would be
set off against income that is chargeable under this section even after the expiry
of 8 years.
3.10 CHANGES IN THE RATE OF EXCHANGE OF
CURRENCY [SECTION 43A]
(1) The section provides that where an assessee has acquired any asset from a
foreign country for the purpose of his business or profession, and due to a
change thereafter in the exchange rate of the two currencies involved, there
is an increase or decrease in the liability (expressed in Indian rupees) of the
assessee at the time of making the payment, towards the whole or part of
the cost of the asset or towards repayment of the whole or a part of the
money borrowed by him from any person, directly or indirectly, in any
foreign currency specifically for the purpose of acquiring the asset along
with the interest, if any, the following values may be changed accordingly
with respect to the increase or decrease in such liability:
(i) the actual cost of the asset under section 43(1)
(ii) the amount of capital expenditure incurred on scientific research
under section 35(1)(iv)
(iii) the amount of capital expenditure incurred by a company for promoting
family planning amongst its employees under section 36(1)(ix)
(iv) the cost of acquisition of a non-depreciable capital asset falling under
section 48.
The amount arrived at after making the above adjustment shall be taken as
the amount of capital expenditure or the cost of acquisition of the capital
asset, as the case may be.
(2) Where the whole or any part of the liability aforesaid is met, not by the
assessee, but, directly or indirectly, by any other person or authority, the
liability so met shall not be taken into account for the purposes of this section.
(3) Where the assessee has entered into a contract with authorised dealer as
defined in section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 for
providing him with a specified sum in a foreign currency on or after a
stipulated future date at the rate of exchange specified in the contract to
enable him to meet the whole or any part of the liability aforesaid, the
amount, if any, for adjustment under this section shall be computed with
reference to the rate of exchange specified therein.
3.11 CERTAIN DEDUCTIONS TO BE MADE ONLY
ON ACTUAL PAYMENT [SECTION 43B]
The following sums are allowed as deduction only in that previous year in which
such sum is actually paid i.e., on actual payment basis.
(a) Any sum payable by way of tax, duty, cess or fee, by whatever name called,
under any law for the time being in force, or
(b) Any sum payable by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution
to any provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or any
other fund for the welfare of employees, or
(c) Bonus or Commission for services rendered payable to employees, or
(d) Any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing
from any public financial institution or a State Financial Corporation or
a State Industrial Investment Corporation, or
(da) Any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing
from notified class of non-banking financial companies, in accordance
with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or
borrowing, or
(e) Interest on any loan or advance from a scheduled bank or co-operative
bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a primary co-
operative agricultural and rural development bank, in accordance with the
terms and conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing, or
(f) Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer in lieu of earned leave of
his employee, or
(g) Any sum payable by the assessee to the Indian Railways for use of Railway
assets.
For the purpose of claiming deduction of the sums referred to above in clauses (a)
to (g) in the relevant previous year in which the expenditure is incurred, the above
sums have to be paid by the assessee on or before the due date for furnishing
the return of income under section 139(1) in respect of the previous year in which
the liability to pay such sum was incurred and the evidence of such payment is
furnished by the assessee along with such return.
Example: An assessee may collect GST from customers during the month of March,
2025. However, in respect of such collections he may have to discharge the liability
only within say 20th April, 2025 under the GST law. The Explanation covers this type of
liability also. Consequently, if an assessee following accrual method of accounting has
created a provision in respect of such a liability the same is not deductible unless
remitted within the due date specified in this section.
Conversion of interest into a loan or borrowing or debenture or any other
instrument
Explanation 3C, 3CA & 3D clarifies that if any sum payable by the assessee as
interest on any such loan or borrowing or advance referred to in (d), (e) and (f)
above, is converted into a loan or borrowing or advance or debenture or any
other instrument by which the liability to pay is deferred to a future date, the
interest so converted and not “actually paid” shall not be deemed as actual
payment, and hence would not be allowed as deduction. The clarificatory
explanations only reiterate the rationale that conversion of interest into a loan or
borrowing or advance or debenture or any other instrument by which the liability
to pay is deferred to a future date does not amount to actual payment.
The manner in which the converted interest will be allowed as deduction has been
clarified in Circular No.7/2006 dated 17.7.2006. The unpaid interest, whenever
actually paid to the bank or financial institution, will be in the nature of revenue
expenditure deserving deduction in the computation of income. Therefore,
irrespective of the nomenclature, the deduction will be allowed in the previous
year in which the converted interest is actually paid.
ILLUSTRATION 14
Hari, an individual, carried on the business of purchase and sale of agricultural
commodities like paddy, wheat, etc. He borrowed loans from Andhra Pradesh State
Financial Corporation (APSFC) and Indian Bank and has not paid interest as detailed
hereunder:
`
(i) Andhra Pradesh State Financial Corporation (P.Y. 2023-24 & 2024-25) 15,00,000
(ii) Indian Bank (P.Y. 2024-25) 30,00,000
45,00,000
Both APSFC and Indian Bank, while restructuring the loan facilities of Hari during
the year 2024-25, converted the above interest payable by Hari to them as a loan
repayable in 60 equal installments. During the year ended 31.3.2025, Hari paid 5
installments to APSFC and 3 installments to Indian Bank.
Hari claimed the entire interest of ` 45,00,000 as an expenditure while computing
the income from business of purchase and sale of agricultural commodities.
Examine whether his claim is valid and if not what is the amount of interest, if any,
allowable.
SOLUTION
According to section 43B, any interest payable on the term loans to specified
financial institutions and any interest payable on any loans and advances to, inter
alia, scheduled banks shall be allowed only in the year of payment of such
interest irrespective of the method of accounting followed by the assessee. Where
there is default in the payment of interest by the assessee, such unpaid interest
may be converted into loan. Such conversion of unpaid interest into loan shall not
be construed as payment of interest for the purpose of section 43B. The amount
of unpaid interest so converted as loan shall be allowed as deduction only in the
year in which the converted loan is actually paid.
In the given case of Hari, the unpaid interest of ` 15,00,000 due to APSFC and of
` 30,00,000 due to Indian Bank was converted into loan. Such conversion would
not amount to payment of interest and would not, therefore, be eligible for
deduction in the year of such conversion. Hence, claim of Hari that the entire
interest of ` 45,00,000 is to be allowed as deduction in the year of conversion is
not tenable. The deduction shall be allowed only to the extent of repayment
made during the financial year. Accordingly, the amount of interest eligible for
deduction for the A.Y.2025-26 shall be calculated as follows:
Interest Number of Amount Instalments Interest
outstanding Instalments per paid allowable
instalment (`)
APSFC 15 lakh 60 25,000 5 1,25,000
Indian Bank 30 lakh 60 50,000 3 1,50,000
Total amount eligible for deduction 2 , 7 5 , 0 0 0
Clarification on non-applicability of section 43B on employee's Contribution
to welfare funds [Explanation 5 to section 43B]
As per section 2(24)(x), any sum received by an assessee, being an employer from
his employee as contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or
any fund set up under Employee’s State Insurance Act, 1948 or any other fund for
the welfare of employees would be considered as the income of an employer.
The deduction in respect of above sum will be allowed to the assessee under
section 36(1)(va) only if such sum is credited by the assessee to the employee’s
account in the relevant fund on or before the due date, being the date specified
under the relevant Act, Rule, order or notification issued thereunder.
As per section 43B, any sum payable by the assessee as an employer by way of
contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or
any other fund for the welfare of employees, would be allowable during any P.Y. if
the same has been paid on or before the 'due date' applicable in his case for
furnishing the return of income under section 139(1) in respect of that P.Y.
Explanation 5 clarifies that the provisions of section 43B regarding allowability of
certain expenditure in a previous year only on actual payment basis (i.e., payment
on or before the due date of filing of return of income for relevant assessment
year), does not apply and would deemed never to be applied to employee’s
contribution received by employer towards any welfare fund. In effect, clause (b)
of section 43B covers only employer’s contribution to provident fund,
superannuation fund, gratuity fund or any other fund for welfare of employees,
for remittance of which extended time limit upto due date of filing return u/s
139(1) is available; however, it does not include within its scope, employees’
contribution to such funds received by the employer, which has to be credited to
the employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before the due date specified
under the relevant Act, Rule etc. Amount credited after the said due date but on
or before the due date under section 139(1) would not be eligible for deduction.
Section 43B [Clause (h)]
Any sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise beyond the time-
limit specified in section 15 of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
Development Act, 2006 would be allowed as deduction only in that previous
year in which such sum is actually paid.
Section 15 of the of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act,
2006 mandates payment of goods or services to supplier, being a micro or small
enterprises by the buyer on or before the date agreed upon between them in
writing i.e., as per the written agreement, which cannot be more than 45 days
from the day of acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance of any goods or
services by a buyer from a supplier. If there is no such written agreement, the
payment shall be made before the appointed day i.e., within 15 days.
If the sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise is paid as per
written agreement (maximum within 45 days) or within 15 days in case of no
agreement, the deduction can be claimed on accrual basis if mercantile method
of accounting is followed by the assessee.
However, if the sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise is not
paid as per written agreement or within 15 days in case of no agreement, the
deduction would be allowed in the previous year in which it is actually paid.
Example: Mr. A has purchased goods of ` 10,000 from A & Co., a micro enterprise
on 1.3.2025. As per the written agreement between them, the payment has to be
made by 5.4.2025. Mr. A follows mercantile method of accounting.
(i) If Mr. A paid the sum on 2.4.2025
Since Mr. A paid the sum on or before 5.4.2025, the deduction would be allowed in
P.Y. 2024-25.
(ii) If Mr. A paid the sum on 20.4.2025
Since Mr. A paid the sum beyond the time limit, the deduction would be allowed in
the year of actual payment i.e., P.Y. 2025-26.
Meaning of Micro and Small enterprise
S. No. Meaning
Manufacturing enterprises and enterprises rendering services
(1) Micro Enterprise
Investment in Plant and Machinery AND Turnover ≤ ` 5 crore
or Equipment ≤ ` 1 crore
(2) Small Enterprise
Investment in Plant and Machinery AND Turnover ≤ ` 50 crore
or Equipment ≤ ` 10 crore
Any sum payable means a sum for which the assessee incurred liability
in the previous year even though such sum might not have been payable
within that year under the relevant law.
3.12 STAMP DUTY VALUE OF LAND AND
BUILDING TO BE TAKEN AS THE FULL
VALUE OF CONSIDERATION IN RESPECT OF
TRANSFER, EVEN IF THE SAME ARE HELD
BY THE TRANSFEROR AS STOCK-IN-TRADE
[SECTION 43CA]
(i) Section 43CA has been inserted as an anti-avoidance measure to provide
that where the consideration for the transfer of an asset (other than capital
asset), being land or building or both, is less than the stamp duty value, the
value so adopted or assessed or assessable (i.e., the stamp duty value) shall
be deemed to be the full value of the consideration for the purposes of
computing income under the head “Profits and gains of business of
profession”.
However, if the stamp duty value does not exceed 110% of the
consideration received or accruing, then, such consideration shall be
deemed to be the full value of consideration for the purpose of computing
profits and gains from transfer of such asset.
(ii) Further, where the date of an agreement fixing the value of consideration
for the transfer of the asset and the date of registration of the transfer of
the asset are not same, the stamp duty value may be taken as on the date of
the agreement for transfer instead of on the date of registration for such
transfer, provided at least a part of the consideration has been received by
way of an account payee cheque/account payee bank draft or use of ECS
through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes
on or before the date of the agreement.
The prescribed electronic modes include credit card, debit card, net
banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI (Unified Payment
Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National Electronic
Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay [CBDT
Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].
(iii) The Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of the asset to a valuation
officer in the following cases -
(1) Where the assessee claims before any Assessing Officer that the value
adopted or assessed or assessable by the authority for payment of
stamp duty exceeds the fair market value of the property as on the
date of transfer and
(2) the value so adopted or assessed or assessable by such authority has
not been disputed in any appeal or revision or no reference has been
made before any other authority, court or High Court.
(iv) Where the value ascertained by the Valuation Officer exceeds the value
adopted or assessed or assessable by the Stamp Valuation Authority, the
value adopted or assessed or assessable shall be taken as the full value of
the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer.
The term ‘assessable’ has been defined to mean the price which the stamp
valuation authority would have, notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in any other law for the time being in force, adopted or assessed, if it
were referred to such authority for the purposes of the payment of stamp duty.
Date of Actual Stamp duty Stamp duty Full value Remark
transfer consideration value on the value (SDV) of
of land/ date of on the date of considera-
building agreement registration tion
held as
` in lakhs
stock-in-
trade
Example:
1/9/2024 100 120 130 120 As part of the
(` 10 lakhs (1/7/2024) (1/9/2024) consideration
received by is received by
A/c payee
A/c payee
cheque on cheque on
1/7/2024) the date of
agreement,
Stamp duty
value (SDV)
on the date
of agreement
to be
adopted as
full value of
consideration,
since the SDV
exceeds 110%
of
consideration
i.e., ` 110
lakhs.
Example:
1/9/2024 100 109 130 130 SDV on the
(` 10 lakhs (1/7/2024) (1/9/2024) date of
received by registration to
cash on be adopted as
1/7/2024) full value of
consideration
and such SDV
exceeds 110%
of
consideration
i.e., ` 110
lakhs. Since
part of
consideration
is received by
cash on the
date of
agreement,
the SDV on
the date of
agreement
cannot be
considered
vis-à-vis actual
consideration.
Example:
31/1/2025 100 109 130 100 Actual sales
(` 10 lakhs (1/7/2024) (31/1/2025) consideration
received by would be the
full value of
A/c payee
cheque on consideration,
1/7/2024) since SDV on
the date of
agreement
does not
exceed 110%
of actual
consideration.
SDV on the
date of
agreement can
be considered
vis-à-vis actual
consideration,
since part of
the
consideration
has been
received by
account payee
cheque on the
date of
agreement.
Example:
31/3/2025 100 120 130 130 SDV of the
(Full amount (1/5/2024) (31/3/2025) date of
received in registration
cash on the would be the
date of full value of
registration) consideration
since the SDV
exceeds
110% of
consideration
i.e., ` 110
lakhs.
3.13 COMPULSORY MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUNTS
[SECTION 44AA]
(1) Maintenance of books of account and other documents by notified
professions [section 44AA(1)]: This section provides that every person
carrying on the legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or
accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or any other
profession as has been notified by the CBDT in the official gazette must
statutorily maintain such books of accounts and other documents as may
enable the assessing officer to compute his total income in accordance with
the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Notified professions: The professions notified so far are as the profession
of authorised representative; the profession of film artist (actor, camera
man, director, music director, art director, editor, singer, lyricist, story writer,
screen play writer, dialogue writer and dress designer); the profession of
company secretary; and information technology professionals.
Prescribed books of accounts & other documents: The CBDT has been
authorised, having due regard to the nature of the business or profession
carried on by any class of persons, to prescribe by rules the books of
account and other documents including inventories, wherever necessary,
to be kept and maintained by the taxpayer, the particulars to be contained
therein and the form and manner in which and the place at which they
must be kept and maintained.
Rules pertaining to maintenance of books of accounts & other
documents:
Rule 6F of the Income-tax Rules contains the details relating to the books of
account and other documents to be maintained by certain professionals
under section 44AA(1).
Prescribed class of persons: As per Rule 6F, every person carrying on legal,
medical, engineering, or architectural profession or the profession of
accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or authorised
representative or film artist shall keep and maintain the books of account
and other documents specified in Rule 6F(2) in the following cases :
– if his gross receipts exceed ` 1,50,000 in all the 3 years
immediately preceding the previous year; or
– if, where the profession has been newly set up in the previous year, his
gross receipts are likely to exceed ` 1,50,000 in that year.
Professionals whose gross receipts are less than the specified
limits given above are also required to maintain books of account
but these have not been specified in the Rule.
In other words, they are required to maintain such books of account and other
documents as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute the total income
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Prescribed books of accounts and other documents [Sub-rule (2) of
Rule 6F]: The following books of account and other documents are required
to be maintained.
(i) a cash book;
(ii) a journal, if accounts are maintained on mercantile basis ;
(iii) a ledger;
(iv) Carbon copies of bills and receipts issued by the person whether
machine numbered or otherwise serially numbered, in relation to sums
exceeding ` 25;
(v) Original bills and receipts issued to the person in respect of
expenditure incurred by the person, or where such bills and receipts
are not issued, payment vouchers prepared and signed by the person,
provided the amount does not exceed ` 50. Where the cash book
contains adequate particulars, the preparation and signing of payment
vouchers is not required.
In case of a person carrying on medical profession, he will be required to
maintain the following in addition to the list given above:
(i) a daily case register in Form 3C.
(ii) an inventory under broad heads of the stock of drugs, medicines and
other consumable accessories as on the first and last day of the
previous year used for his profession.
Place at which books to be kept and maintained: The books and
documents shall be kept and maintained at the place where the person is
carrying on the profession, or where there is more than one place, at the
principal place of his profession. However, if he maintains separate set of
books for each place of his profession, such books and documents may be
kept and maintained at the respective places.
Period for which the books of account and other documents are
required to be kept and maintained by notified professions: The Central
Board of Direct Taxes has also been empowered to prescribe, by rules, the
period for which the books of account and other documents are required to
be kept and maintained by the taxpayer.
The above books of account and documents shall be kept and maintained
for a minimum of 6 years from the end of the relevant assessment year.
ILLUSTRATION 15
Vinod is a person carrying on profession as film artist. His gross receipts from
profession are as under:
Particulars `
Financial year 2021-22 1,15,000
Financial year 2022-23 1,80,000
Financial year 2023-24 2,10,000
What is his obligation regarding maintenance of books of accounts for
Assessment Year 2025-26 under section 44AA of Income-tax Act, 1961?
SOLUTION
Section 44AA(1) requires every person carrying on any profession, notified
by the Board in the Official Gazette (in addition to the professions already
specified therein), to maintain such books of account and other documents
as may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
As per Rule 6F, a person carrying on a notified profession shall be required
to maintain specified books of accounts:
(i) if his gross receipts in all the three years immediately preceding the
relevant previous year has exceeded ` 1,50,000; or
(ii) if it is a new profession which is setup in the relevant previous year, it
is likely to exceed ` 1,50,000 in that previous year.
In the present case, Vinod is a person carrying on profession as film artist, which
is a notified profession. Since his gross receipts have not exceeded ` 1,50,000 in
financial year 2021-22, the requirement under section 44AA to compulsorily
maintain the prescribed books of account is not applicable to him.
Mr. Vinod, however, required to maintain such books of accounts as would
enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income.
(2) Maintenance of books of account and other documents by persons
carrying on business or profession [other than notified professions
referred to in section 44AA(1)] [Section 44AA(2)]
I. In case of Individual or HUF: An Individual or HUF carrying on any
business or profession (other than notified professions specified in section
44AA(1)) must maintain such books of account and other documents as
may enable the Assessing Officer to compute his total income in
accordance the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following
circumstances:
(i) Existing business or profession: In cases where the income
from the existing business or profession exceeds ` 2,50,000 or
the total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be,
in the business or profession exceed ` 25,00,000 in any one of
three years immediately preceding the accounting year; or
(ii) Newly set up business or profession: In cases where the
business or profession is newly set up in any previous year, if his
income from business or profession is likely to exceed
` 2,50,000 or his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the
case may be, in the business or profession are likely to exceed
` 25,00,000 during the previous year.
II. Person (other than individual or HUF): Every person (other than
individual or HUF) carrying on any business or profession [other than
the notified professions referred to in section 44AA(1)] must maintain
such books of account and other documents as may enable the
Assessing Officer to compute his total income in accordance the
provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following circumstances:
(i) Existing business or profession: In cases where the income
from the business or profession exceeds ` 1,20,000 or the total
sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the
business or profession exceed ` 10,00,000 in any one of three
years immediately preceding the accounting year; or
(ii) Newly set up business or profession: In cases where the
business or profession is newly set up in any previous year, if his
income from business or profession is likely to exceed `
1,20,000 or his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the
case may be, in the business or profession are likely to exceed
` 10,00,000 during the previous year;
III. Showing lower income as compared to income computed on
presumptive basis under section 44AE (or section 44BB or section
44BBB)8: Where profits and gains from the business are calculated on
a presumptive basis under section 44AE (or section 44BB or section
44BBB) and the assessee has claimed that his income is lower than the
profits or gains so deemed to be the profits and gains of his business.
IV. Where the provisions of section 44AD(4) are applicable in his case
and his income exceeds the basic exemption limit in any previous
year: In cases, where an assessee not eligible to claim the benefit of
the provisions of section 44AD(1) for five assessment years
subsequent to the assessment year relevant to the previous year in
which the profit has not been declared in accordance with the
provisions of 44AD(1) and his income exceeds the basic exemption
limit during the previous year.
(2) Penalty for failure to maintain books of account [Section 271A]
If a person fails to keep and maintain any such books of account and other
documents as required by section 44AA in respect of any previous year or
to retain such books of account and other documents for the specified
period, penalty of ` 25,000 would be leviable under section 271A.
3.14 AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS OF CERTAIN
PERSONS CARRYING ON BUSINESS OR
PROFESSION [SECTION 44AB]
(i) Requirement of Tax Audit: It is obligatory for the persons mentioned in
column (2) of the table below, carrying on business or profession, to get his
accounts audited before the “specified date” by a Chartered Accountant, if the
conditions mentioned in the corresponding row of column (3) are satisfied
Persons When tax audit is required?
(1) (2) (3)
I In case of a person carrying
on business
(a) In case of a person carrying on If his total sales, turnover or gross
business receipts in business > ` 1 crore in
the relevant PY
8Section 44BB, 44BBB will be discussed at Final level.
Note – The requirement of audit u/s
44AB does not apply to a person
who declares profits and gains for
the previous year on presumptive
basis u/s 44AD(1).
If in case of such person If his total sales, turnover or gross
carrying on business - receipts in business > ` 10 crore in
(i) Aggregate cash receipts in the relevant PY
the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total
receipts (incl. receipts for
sales, turnover, gross
receipts); and
(ii) Aggregate cash payments in
the relevant PY ≤ 5% of total
payments (incl. amount
incurred for expenditure)
Note – For this purpose, the payment or receipt, as the case may be,
by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not
account payee, would be deemed to be the payment or receipt, as
the case may be, in cash.
(b) In case of an assessee covered If such assessee claims that the
u/s 44AE i.e., an assessee profits and gains from business in
engaged in the business of the relevant P.Y. are lower than the
plying, hiring or leasing goods profits and gains computed on a
carriages who owns not more presumptive basis u/s 44AE [i.e.,
than 10 goods carriages at any ` 1000 per ton of gross vehicle
time during the P.Y. weight or unladen weight in case of
each heavy goods vehicle and
` 7,500 for each vehicle, other than
heavy goods vehicle, for every
month or part of the month for
which the vehicle is owned by the
assessee].
(c) In case of an eligible assessee If he declares profit for any of the
carrying on business, whose five successive PYs (say, P.Y.2024-
total turnover, sales, gross 25) not in accordance with section
receipts ≤ ` 200 lakhs, and who 44AD (i.e., he declares profits lower
has opted for section 44AD in than 8% or 6% of total turnover,
any earlier PY (say, P.Y. sales or gross receipts, as the case
2023-24) may be, in that year), then, he
In case of an eligible assessee cannot opt for section 44AD for five
carrying on business, whose successive PYs after the year of such
aggregate cash receipts in the default (i.e., from P.Y.2025-26 to
relevant PY ≤ 5% of total P.Y.2029-30). For the year of
turnover or gross receipts and default (i.e., P.Y.2024-25) and five
whose total turnover, sales, successive previous years (i.e.,
gross receipts ≤ ` 300 lakhs, P.Y.2025-26 to P.Y.2029-30), he has
and who has opted for section to maintain books of account u/s
44AD in any earlier PY (say, P.Y. 44AA and get them audited u/s
2023-24) 44AB, if his income exceeds the
basic exemption limit.
II In case of persons carrying on
profession
(a) In case of a person carrying on If his gross receipts in profession >
profession ` 50 lakh in the relevant PY.
Note – The requirement of audit u/s
44AB does not apply to a person
who declares profits and gains for
the previous year on presumptive
basis u/s 44ADA(1).
(b) In case of an assessee carrying If such resident assessee claims that
on a notified profession under the profits and gains from such
section 44AA(1) i.e., legal profession in the relevant PY are
medical, engineering, lower than the profits and gains
accountancy, architecture, computed on a presumptive basis u/s
interior decoration, technical 44ADA (50% of gross receipts) and
consultancy, whose gross his income exceeds the basic
receipts ≤ ` 50 lakhs exemption limit in that PY.
In case of an assessee carrying
on a notified profession under
section 44AA(1) i.e., legal
medical, engineering,
accountancy, architecture,
interior decoration, technical
consultancy, whose aggregate
cash receipts in the relevant PY
≤ 5% of total gross receipts
and whose gross receipts ≤ ` 75
lakhs
(ii) Audit Report: The persons mentioned above would have to furnish by the
specified date a report of the audit in the prescribed forms. For this
purpose, the Board has prescribed under Rule 6G, Forms 3CA/ 3CB/ 3CD
containing forms of audit report and particulars to be furnished therewith.
(iii) Accounts audited under other statutes are considered: In cases where
the accounts of a person are required to be audited by or under any other
law before the specified date, it will be sufficient if the person gets his
accounts audited under such other law before the specified date and also
furnish by the said date the report of audit in the prescribed form in
addition to the report of audit required under such other law.
Thus, for example, the provision regarding compulsory audit does not imply a
second or separate audit of accounts of companies whose accounts are
already required to be audited under the Companies Act, 2013. The provision
only requires that companies should get their accounts audited under the
Companies Act, 2013 before the specified date and in addition to the report
required to be given by the auditor under the Companies Act, 2013 furnish a
report for tax purposes in the form to be prescribed in this behalf by the
CBDT.
(iv) Specified date: The expression “specified date” in relation to the accounts
of the previous year or years relevant to any assessment year means the
date one month prior to the due date for furnishing the return of income
under section 139(1).
The due date for filing return of income in case of assessees (other than
companies) who are required to get their accounts audited is 31st October
of the relevant assessment year. Hence, the specified date for tax audit
would be 30th September of the relevant assessment year9.
(v) Penalty for failure to get books of account audited: If any person fails to
get his accounts audited in respect of any previous year or furnish the audit
report by the specified date, penalty of lower of (a) and (b) mentioned
below would be leviable on such person –
9 Except where the assessee has to file transfer pricing report u/s 92E, for whom the due
date u/s 139(1) is 30th November of the A.Y.; and hence, the specified date would be
31st October, in such cases. This is, however, not applicable for Intermediate level.
(a) ½% of total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in
business or of the gross receipts in profession, in such previous year; or
(b) ` 1,50,000 [Section 271B].
3.15 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR COMPUTING
PROFITS AND GAINS OF BUSINESS ON
PRESUMPTIVE BASIS [SECTIONS 44AD/
44ADA/44AE]
Particulars Section 44AD Section 44ADA Section 44AE
(1) Eligible Resident individual, Resident individual An assessee
Assessee HUF or Partnership or Partnership firm owning not
firm (but not LLP) (but not LLP) more than 10
engaged in eligible engaged in any goods
business and who has profession carriages at
not claimed deduction specified u/s any time
under section 10AA or 4AA(1), namely, during the P.Y.
Chapter VIA under “C legal, medical,
– Deductions in engineering,
respect of certain architectural
incomes” profession or
Non-applicability of profession of
section 44AD in accountancy or
respect of the technical
following persons: consultancy or
- A person carrying on interior decoration
or notified
profession specified
profession
u/s 44AA(1);
(authorized
- A person earning
representative, film
income in the
artist, company
nature of
secretary,
commission or
profession of
brokerage;
information
- A person carrying
technology)
on any agency
business.
(2) Eligible Any business, other Any profession Business of
business/ than business specified u/s plying, hiring
profession referred to in section 44AA(1), whose or leasing
44AE, whose total gross receipts ≤ goods
turnover/gross ` 50 lakhs in the carriages
receipts in the P.Y. ≤ relevant P.Y.
` 200 lakhs in the
relevant P.Y.
Any business, other Any profession
than business referred specified u/s
to in section 44AE, 44AA(1), whose
whose total gross receipts ≤
turnover/gross ` 75 lakhs in the
receipts in the P.Y. ≤ relevant P.Y., if
` 300 lakhs in the aggregate cash
relevant P.Y., if receipts in the
aggregate cash relevant PY ≤ 5%
receipts in the of total gross
relevant PY ≤ 5% of receipts.
total turnover or
gross receipts.
In effect, if the In effect, if the gross
turnover of business is receipts from
> ` 200 lakhs ≤ ` 300 profession is > ` 50
lakhs, the benefit of lakhs ≤ ` 75 lakhs,
section 44AD can be the benefit of
availed only if section 44ADA can
aggregate cash be availed only if
receipts in relevant aggregate cash
P.Y. ≤ 5% of total receipts in relevant
turnover or gross P.Y. ≤ 5% of total
receipts. gross receipts.
Note: For this purpose, the receipt of
amount or aggregate of amounts by a
cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft,
which is not account payee, would be
deemed to be the receipt in cash.
(3) Presumptive 8% of total 50% of gross For each heavy
income turnover/sales/gross receipts of such goods vehicle
receipts or a sum profession or a ` 1,000 per ton
higher than the sum higher than of gross
aforesaid sum the aforesaid sum vehicle weight
claimed to have been claimed to have or unladen
earned by the been earned by the weight, as the
assessee. assessee. case may be, for
6% of total turnover/ every month or
gross receipts in part of a month;
respect of the amount For each
of total turnover/ vehicle, other
sales/gross receipts than heavy
received by A/c payee goods vehicle:
cheque/ bank draft/ ` 7,500 per
ECS through a bank
month or part
account or through
of a month
such other prescribed
during which
electronic modes
such vehicle is
(credit card, debit
owned by the
card, net banking,
assessee or an
IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT,
amount claimed
and BHIM Aadhar Pay)
to have been
during the P.Y. or
actually earned
before due date of
from such
filing of return u/s
vehicle,
139(1) in respect of
whichever is
that P.Y. (or) such
higher.
higher sum claimed to
have been earned by
the assessee.
(4) Non- Deductions allowable under sections 30 to 38 shall be
allowability deemed to have been given full effect to and no further
of deduction shall be allowed
deductions
Even in case of a firm, Even in case of a In case of a
while
salary and interest firm, salary and firm, salary and
computing
paid to partners is interest paid to interest paid
presumptive
not deductible. partners is not to partners is
income
deductible. deductible
subject to the
conditions and
limits specified
in section
40(b)
(5) Written WDV of any asset of an eligible business/profession shall be
down value deemed to have been calculated as if the eligible assessee
of asset had claimed and had been actually allowed depreciation for
each of the relevant assessment years
(6) Requirement If eligible assessee If eligible assessee If eligible
of declares profits and declares profits and assessee
maintenance gains in accordance gains in accordance declares profits
of books of with the provisions of with the provisions and gains in
account u/s section 44AD, he is of section 44ADA, accordance with
44AA and not required to he is not required the provisions
audit u/s maintain books of to maintain books of section 44AE,
44AB account u/s 44AA or of account u/s he is not
get them audited u/s 44AA or get them required to
44AB. audited u/s 44AB. maintain books
However, if after However, if the of account u/s
declaring profits on assessee claims his 44AA or get
presumptive basis u/s profits to be lower them audited
44AD, say, for than the profits u/s 44AB.
A.Y.2025-26, non- computed by However, if the
declaration of profits applying the assessee claims
on presumptive basis presumptive rate, his profits to
for any of the 5 he has to maintain be lower than
successive A.Y.s books of account the profits
thereafter (i.e., from and other computed by
A.Y.2026-27 to documents u/s applying the
A.Y.2030-31), say, for 44AA(1) and get presumptive
A.Y. 2027-28, would his accounts rate, he has to
disentitle the audited u/s 44AB, maintain books
assessee from if his total income of account u/s
claiming profits on > basic exemption 44AA(2) and
presumptive basis for limit for that year. get his
five successive AYs accounts
subsequent to the AY audited u/s
relevant to the PY of 44AB.
such non-declaration
(i.e., from A.Y.2028-29
to A.Y.2032-33). In
such a case, the
assessee would have
to maintain books
of account and
other documents
u/s 44AA(2) and get
his accounts audited
u/s 44AB, if his total
income exceeds the
basic exemption
limit in those years.
(7) Advance tax The eligible assessee The eligible The eligible
obligation opting for section assessee opting for assessee has to
44AD is required to section 44ADA is pay advance
pay advance tax by required to pay tax in four
15th March of the advance tax by installments
financial year (F.Y.). 15th March of the [See Chapter 7
F.Y. in Module 3
for details].
Meaning of certain terms for the purpose of section 44AE:
S. Term Meaning
No
(1) Heavy goods vehicle any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight of
which exceeds 12,000 kilograms.
(2) Gross vehicle weight total weight of the vehicle and load certified and
registered by the registering authority as
permissible for that vehicle.
(3) Unladen weight the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all
equipment ordinarily used with the vehicle or
trailer when working but excluding the weight of
driver or attendant and where alternative parts or
bodies are used the unladen weight of the
vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with the
heaviest such alternative body or part
Example:
Let us consider the following particulars relating to a resident individual, Mr. A,
being an eligible assessee carrying on retail trade business whose total turnover do
not exceed ` 2 crore in any of the previous year relevant to A.Y.2025-26 to
A.Y.2027-28-
Particulars A.Y.2025-26 A.Y.2026-27 A.Y.2027-28
Total turnover (`) 1,80,00,000 1,90,00,000 2,00,00,000
Amount received through 1,60,00,000 1,45,00,000 1,80,00,000
prescribed electronic modes on or
before 31st October of the A.Y.
Income offered for taxation (`) 11,20,000 12,30,000 10,00,000
% of gross receipts 6% on ` 1.60 6% on ` 1.45 5% on ` 2
crore and 8% crore and 8% crore
on ` 20 lakhs on ` 45 lakhs
Offered income as per presumptive Yes Yes No
taxation scheme u/s 44AD
In the above case, Mr. A, an eligible assessee, opts for presumptive taxation under
section 44AD for A.Y.2025-26 and A.Y.2026-27 and offers income of ` 11.20 lakh
and ` 12.30 lakh on gross receipts of ` 1.80 crore and ` 1.90 crore, respectively.
However, for A.Y.2027-28, he offers income of only ` 10 lakh on turnover of ` 2
crore, which amounts to 5% of his gross receipts. He maintains books of account
under section 44AA and gets the same audited under section 44AB. Since he has
not offered income in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) for five
consecutive assessment years, after A.Y. 2025-26, he will not be eligible to claim the
benefit of section 44AD for next five assessment years succeeding A.Y.2027-28 i.e.,
from A.Y.2028-29 to 2032-33.
ILLUSTRATION 16
Mr. Praveen engaged in retail trade, reports a turnover of ` 2,98,50,000 for the
financial year 2024-25. Amount received in cash during the P.Y. 2024-25 is
` 14,00,000 and balance through prescribed electronic modes on or before 31st July
2025. His income from the said business as per books of account is ` 15,00,000
computed as per the provisions of Chapter IV-D “Profits and gains from business or
Profession” of the Income-tax Act, 1961. Retail trade is the only source of income
for Mr. Praveen. A.Y. 2024-25 was the first year for which he declared his business
income in accordance with the provisions of presumptive taxation u/s 44AD.
(i) Is Mr. Praveen also eligible for presumptive determination of his income
chargeable to tax for the assessment year 2025-26?
(ii) If so, determine his income from retail trade as per the applicable presumptive
provision.
(iii) In case Mr. Praveen wants to declare profits as per books of account from
retail trade, what are his obligations under the Income-tax Act, 1961?
(iii) What is the due date for filing his return of income under both the options?
SOLUTION
(i) Yes. Since his cash receipts during the P.Y. does not 5% of the total turnover
(14,00,000/2,98,50,000 x 100) and his total turnover for the F.Y.2024-25 is
below ` 300 lakhs, he is eligible for presumptive taxation scheme under
section 44AD in respect of his retail trade business.
(ii) His income from retail trade, applying the presumptive tax provisions under
section 44AD, would be ` 18,19,000 (` 1,12,000, being 8% of ` 14,00,000 +
` 17,07,000, being 6% of ` 2,84,50,000).
(iii) Mr. Praveen had declared profit for the previous year 2023-24 in accordance
with the presumptive provisions and if he wants to declare profits as per
books of account which is lower than the presumptive income for any of the
five consecutive assessment years i.e., A.Y. 2025-26 to A.Y. 2029-30, he
would not be eligible to claim the benefit of presumptive taxation for five
assessment years subsequent to the assessment year relevant to the
previous year in which the profit has not been declared in accordance the
presumptive provisions i.e. if he declares profits lower than the presumptive
income in say P.Y. 2024-25 relevant to A.Y.2025-26, then he would not be
eligible to claim the benefit of presumptive taxation for A.Y. 2026-27 to
A.Y. 2030-31.
Consequently, Mr. Praveen is required to maintain the books of accounts
and get them audited under section 44AB, since his income exceeds the
basic exemption limit.
(iv) In case he declares presumptive income under section 44AD, the due date
would be 31st July, 2025.
In case he declares profits as per books of account which is lower than the
presumptive income, he is required to get his books of account audited, in
which case the due date for filing of return of income would be 31st
October, 2025.
ILLUSTRATION 17
Mr. X commenced the business of operating goods vehicles on 1.4.2024. He
purchased the following vehicles during the P.Y.2024-25. Compute his income
under section 44AE for A.Y.2025-26.
Gross Vehicle Weight Number Date of purchase
(in kilograms)
(1) 7,000 2 10.04.2024
(2) 6,500 1 15.03.2025
(3) 10,000 3 16.07.2024
(4) 11,000 1 02.01.2025
(5) 15,000 2 29.08.2024
(6) 15,000 1 23.02.2025
Would your answer change if the goods vehicles purchased in April, 2024 were put
to use only in July, 2024?
SOLUTION
Since Mr. X does not own more than 10 vehicles at any time during the previous
year 2024-25, he is eligible to opt for presumptive taxation scheme under section
44AE. ` 1,000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight per month or
part of the month for each heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 per month or part of
month for each goods carriage other than heavy goods vehicle, owned by him
would be deemed as his profits and gains from such goods carriage.
Heavy goods vehicle means any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight of which
exceeds 12,000 kg.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Number of Date of No. of months for No. of months × No. of
Vehicles purchase which vehicle is vehicles
owned [(1) × (3)]
For Heavy goods vehicle
2 29.08.2024 8 16
1 23.02.2025 2 2
18
For goods vehicle other than heavy goods vehicle
2 10.4.2024 12 24
1 15.3.2025 1 1
3 16.7.2024 9 27
1 02.1.2025 3 3
The presumptive income of Mr. X under section 44AE for A.Y.2025-26 would be -
` 6,82,500, i.e., 55 × ` 7,500, being for other than heavy goods vehicle + 18 x
` 1,000 x 15 ton being for heavy goods vehicle.
The answer would remain the same even if the two vehicles purchased in April,
2024 were put to use only in July, 2024, since the presumptive income has to be
calculated per month or part of the month for which the vehicle is owned by
Mr. X.
3.16 COMPUTATION OF BUSINESS INCOME IN
CASES WHERE INCOME IS PARTLY
AGRICULTURAL AND PARTLY BUSINESS IN
NATURE
Taxability in case of composite income
Rule Nature of composite income Business Agricultural
income Income
(Taxable) (Exempt)
7A Income from sale of rubber products 35% 65%
derived from rubber plants grown by the
seller in India
7B Income from sale of coffee
- grown and cured by the seller in India 25% 75%
- grown, cured, roasted and grounded by
the seller in India 40% 60%
8 Income from sale of tea grown and 40% 60%
manufactured by the seller in India
Notes –
(1) In computing income from sale of tea/sale of rubber/sale of coffee, an
allowance shall be made in respect of the cost of planting bushes/rubber
plants/coffee plants in replacement of bushes/plants that have died or become
permanently useless in an area already planted, if such area has not previously
been abandoned. For the purpose of determining such cost, no deduction shall
be made in respect of the amount of any subsidy which, under the provision of
section 10(30) or 10(31), respectively, is not includible in the total income.
(2) Section 10(30) provides exemption of subsidy received by an assessee
carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing tea in India from or
through the Tea Board for replantation or replacement of tea bushes or for
rejuvenation or consolidation of areas used for cultivation of tea, subject to
fulfillment of specified conditions.
(3) Section 10(31) provides exemption of subsidy received by an assessee
carrying on the business of growing and manufacturing rubber, coffee,
cardamom or other notified commodity in India from or through concerned
Board for replantation or replacement of rubber plants, coffee plants,
cardamom plants or plants for the growing of other notified commodity or
for rejuvenation or consolidation of areas used for cultivation of rubber,
coffee, cardamom or other notified commodity, subject to fulfillment of
specified conditions.
ILLUSTRATION 18
Miss Vivitha, a resident and ordinarily resident in India, has derived the following
income from various operations (relating to plantations and estates owned by her)
during the year ended 31-3-2025:
S. No. Particulars `
(i) Income from sale of centrifuged latex processed from rubber 3,00,000
plants grown in Darjeeling.
(ii) Income from sale of coffee grown and cured in Yercaud, Tamil 1,00,000
Nadu.
(iii) Income from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and grounded, in 2,50,000
Colombo. Sale consideration was received at Chennai.
(iv) Income from sale of tea grown and manufactured in Shimla. 4,00,000
(v) Income from sapling and seedling grown in a nursery at Cochin. 80,000
Basic operations were not carried out by her on land.
You are required to compute the business income and agricultural income of Miss
Vivitha for the A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of business income and agricultural income of
Ms. Vivitha for the A.Y.2025-26
Sr. Source of income Gross Business income Agricultural
No. (`) income
%
` `
(i) Sale of centrifuged latex 3,00,000 35% 1,05,000 1,95,000
from rubber plants grown
in India.
(ii) Sale of coffee grown and 1,00,000 25% 25,000 75,000
cured in India.
(iii) Sale of coffee grown, cured, 2,50,000 100% 2,50,000 -
roasted and grounded
outside India. (See Note 1
below)
(iv) Sale of tea grown and 4,00,000 40% 1,60,000 2,40,000
manufactured in India
(v) Saplings and seedlings
grown in nursery in India 80,000 Nil 80,000
(See Note 2 below)
Total 5,40,000 5,90,000
Notes:
1. Where income is derived from sale of coffee grown, cured, roasted and
grounded by the seller in India, 40% of such income is taken as business
income and the balance as agricultural income. However, in this question, these
operations are done in Colombo, Sri lanka. Hence, there is no question of such
apportionment and the whole income is taxable as business income. Receipt of
sale proceeds in India does not make this agricultural income. In the case of an
assessee, being a resident and ordinarily resident, the income arising outside
India is also chargeable to tax.
2. Explanation 3 to section 2(1A) provides that the income derived from
saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery would be deemed to be
agricultural income whether or not the basic operations were carried out on
land. Therefore, such income would be exempt u/s 10(1).
LET US RECAPITULATE
Method of Accounting [Section 145]
Income chargeable under this head shall be computed in accordance with the
method of accounting, either cash or mercantile basis, regularly and
consistently employed by the assessee.
Income chargeable under this head [Section 28]
(i) The profits and gains of any business or profession carried on by the
assessee at any time during the previous year. However, any income
from letting out of a residential house or a part of the house by the
owner shall not be chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” and would be chargeable under the head
“Income from house property”.
(ii) Any compensation or other payment due to or received by a person, at
or in connection with -
(a) Termination of his management or modification of the terms and
conditions relating thereto, in case the person is managing the
whole or substantially the whole of the affairs of an Indian
company.
(b) Termination of his office or modification of the terms and conditions
relating thereto, in case the person is managing the whole or
substantially the whole of the affairs in India of any other company.
(c) Termination of agency or modification of the terms and conditions
relating thereto, in case the person is holding an agency in India for
any part of the activities relating to the business of any other person.
(d) Vesting in the Government or in any corporation owned and
controlled by the Government, under any law for the time being in
force, of the management of any property or business.
(e) Termination or the modification of the terms and conditions, of
any contract relating to his business
(iii) Income derived by a trade, professional or similar association from
specific services performed for its members.
(iv) In the case of an assessee carrying on export business, the following
incentives –
(a) Profit on sale of import entitlements;
(b) Cash assistance against exports under any scheme of GoI;
(c) Customs duty or excise re-paid or repayable as drawback;
(d) Profit on transfer of Duty Free Replenishment Certificate.
(v) The value of any benefit or perquisite arising from business or the
exercise of profession, whether
(a) convertible into money or not; or
(b) in cash or in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind.
(vi) Any interest, salary, bonus, commission or remuneration due to, or
received by, a partner of a firm from such firm (to the extent allowed as
deduction in the hands of the firm).
However, the partner’s share in the total income of the firm or LLP is
exempt from tax [Section 10(2A)].
(vii) Any sum, received or receivable, in cash or kind under an agreement for –
(a) not carrying out any activity in relation to any business or
profession; or
(b) not sharing any know-how, patent, copyright, trademark, licence,
franchise or any other business of commercial right of similar
nature or information or technique likely to assist in the
manufacture or processing of goods or provision of services.
(viii) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum
allocated by way of bonus on such policy.
(ix) Fair market value of inventory as on date on which it is converted into or
treated as a capital asset.
(x) Any sum, whether received or receivable, in cash or kind, on account of
any capital asset (other than land or goodwill or financial instrument)
being demolished, destroyed, discarded or transferred, in respect of
which the whole of the expenditure had been allowed as deduction
under section 35AD.
Computation of income under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”
As per section 29, the income referred to in section 28 has to be computed in
accordance with the provisions contained in sections 30 to 43D.
Admissible Deductions
Section Deduction
30 Amount paid on account of rent, rates, taxes, repairs (not including
expenditure in the nature of capital expenditure) and insurance for
buildings used for the purpose of business or profession.
In case the premises are occupied by the assessee as a tenant, the
amount of repairs would be allowed as deduction only if he has
undertaken to bear the cost of repairs to the premises.
31 Amount paid on account for current repairs and insurance of
machinery, plant and furniture used for the purpose of business
or profession.
32 Depreciation
Depreciation is mandatorily allowable as deduction.
Conditions for claiming depreciation
• Asset must be used for the purpose of business or profession
at any time during the previous year.
Note: If the asset is acquired during the previous year and is
put to use for less than 180 days during that previous year
then, only 50% of the depreciation calculated at the rates
prescribed will be allowed.
• The asset should be owned (wholly or partly) by the assessee.
• The depreciation shall be allowed on the written down value of
block of assets at the prescribed rates (except in the case of
assets of power generating units, in respect of which
depreciation has to be calculated as a percentage of actual
cost).
As per section 2(11), block of assets means a group of assets
falling within a class of assets comprising:
(a) tangible assets, being buildings, machinery, plant or
furniture,
(b) intangible assets, being know-how, patents, copyrights,
trademarks, licences, franchises or any other business or
commercial rights of similar nature, not being goodwill of
a business or profession;
in respect of which, the same rate of depreciation is
prescribed.
Written Down Value of Assets (W.D.V.) [Section 43(6)]
(1) W.D.V. of the block of assets in immediately xxx
preceding previous year
(2) Less: Depreciation actually allowed in respect of xxx
that block of assets in said preceding previous
year
Opening balance as on 1st April of the current P.Y. xxx
Increased by -
(3) Actual cost of assets acquired during the previous xxx
year, not being on account of acquisition of
goodwill of a business or profession
(4) Total (1) - (2) + (3) xxx
Reduced by -
(5) Money receivable in respect of any asset falling xxx
within the block which is sold, discarded,
demolished or destroyed during that previous year
together with scrap value. However, such amount
cannot exceed the amount in (4).
(6) In case of slump sale, actual cost of the asset (-) xxx
amount of depreciation that would have been
allowable to the assessee for any assessment year
as if the asset was the only asset in the block.
However, such amount of reduction cannot exceed
the WDV.
(7) W.D.V at the end of the year (on which xxx
depreciation is allowable) [(4) – (5) – (6)]
(8) Depreciation at the prescribed rate
(Rate of Depreciation × WDV arrived at in (7) xxx
above)
Note – If the actual cost includes cost of asset put to use for less
than 180 days in the relevant P.Y. of acquisition, then,
depreciation on such cost would be 50% of the prescribed rate.
32(1)(iia) In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A),
additional depreciation at the rate of 20% of actual cost of
plant or machinery acquired and installed by an assessee
engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any
article or thing or in the business of generation, transmission or
distribution of power, shall be allowed.
If plant and machinery is acquired and put to use for the purpose
of business or profession for less than 180 days during the
previous year in which it is acquired, additional depreciation will
get restricted to 10% of actual cost (i.e., 50% of 20%). The
balance additional depreciation@10% of actual cost will be
allowed in the immediately succeeding previous year if the
assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) in the immediately
succeeding previous year.
However, additional depreciation will not be allowed on the
following plant or machinery:
• Ships, aircraft, road transport vehicles, office appliances;
• Machinery previously used by any other person;
• Machinery installed in any office premises, residential
accommodation, or guest house;
• Machinery in respect of which, the whole of the actual cost is
fully allowed as deduction (whether by way of depreciation or
otherwise) of any one previous year.
Expenditure on Scientific Research
Expenditure incurred by assessee [Allowable both under the
default tax regime u/s 115BAC and the optional tax regime
i.e., normal provisions of the Act]
• Any revenue and capital expenditure (other than cost of
acquisition of land) on scientific research for in-house research
related to its business is allowable as deduction [Section
35(1)(i) & Section 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)].
• Deduction is also allowed in respect of payment of salary or
purchase of material inputs for such scientific research during
3 years immediately preceding the year of commencement of
business. Such expenditure is deemed to have been incurred
in the year of commencement of business and is, hence,
allowed as deduction in that year [Section 35(1)(i)].
• Capital expenditure incurred during 3 years immediately
preceding the year of commencement of the business is also
deemed to have been incurred in the year in which the
business commences, and is hence, allowed as deduction in
that year [Section 35(1)(iv) read with section 35(2)].
Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research can be
carried forward indefinitely for set-off against any income of the
assessee other than Salaries.
Contributions to Outsiders [Allowable only if the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
In case of an assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and paying
tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal provisions of
the Act, contributions made by any assessee to certain specified/
approved institutions shall be entitled to deduction of 100% of
contribution made to:
Section Association/University/Company/College/IIT
35(1)(ii) Notified approved research association/university/
college/ other institution for scientific research
35(1)(iia) Approved notified Company for scientific research
35(1)(iii) Notified approved research association/university/
college/ other institution for research in social
science or statistical research
35(2AA) Approved National Laboratory/ University/ IIT/
specified person to be used for scientific research
undertaken under an approved programme
Note – Contribution to outsiders for scientific/ social science/
statistical research is not allowable under the default tax regime
u/s 115BAC.
35AD This section provides for investment-linked tax deduction in
respect of the following specified businesses commencing
operations on or after the dates specified thereto, if the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A) -
• setting-up and operating ‘cold chain’ facilities for specified
products (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2009);
• setting-up and operating warehousing facilities for storing
agricultural produce (commencing operations on or after
1.4.2009);
• laying and operating a cross-country natural gas or crude or
petroleum oil pipeline network for distribution, including
storage facilities being an integral part of such network
(commencing operations on or after 1.4.2007);
• building and operating a hotel of two-star or above category,
anywhere in India (commencing operations on or after
1.4.2010);
• building and operating a hospital, anywhere in India, with at
least 100 beds for patients (commencing operations on or
after 1.4.2010);
• developing and building a housing project under a notified
scheme for slum redevelopment or rehabilitation framed by
the Central Government or a State Government (commencing
operations on or after 1.4.2010);
• developing and building a housing project under a notified
scheme for affordable housing framed by the Central
Government or State Government (commencing operations
on or after 1.4.2011);
• production of fertilizer in India (commencing operations on
or after 1.4.2011);
• setting up and operating an inland container depot or a container
freight station notified or approved under the Customs Act, 1962
(commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
• bee-keeping and production of honey and beeswax
(commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
• setting up and operating a warehousing facility for storage of
sugar (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2012);
• laying and operating a slurry pipeline for transportation of
iron-ore (commencing operations on or after 1.4.2014);
• setting up and operating a semiconductor wafer fabrication
manufacturing unit, if such unit is notified by the Board in
accordance with the prescribed guidelines (commencing
operations on or after 1.4.2014).
• developing or maintaining and operating or developing,
maintaining and operating a new infrastructure facility
(commencing operations on or after 1.4.2017)
Quantum of deduction - 100% of the capital expenditure
(other than expenditure on acquisition of any land, goodwill
or financial instrument) incurred during the previous year,
wholly and exclusively for the above specified businesses
would be allowed as deduction from the business income of an
assessee, if he has opted for the provisions of section 35AD.
Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the
purpose of specified business prior to commencement of
operation would be allowed as deduction during the previous
year in which the assessee commences operation of his specified
business, provided the amount incurred prior to commencement
has been capitalized in the books of account of the assessee
on the date of commencement of its operations.
Payment exceeding ` 10,000 to be made through prescribed
electronic modes to qualify for deduction u/s 35AD - Any
expenditure in respect of which payment or aggregate of
payment made to a person of an amount exceeding ` 10,000 in a
day otherwise than by account payee cheque drawn on a bank or
an account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through such other prescribed
electronic modes would not be eligible for deduction.
Non-eligibility for deduction u/s 10AA or Chapter VI-A - An
assessee availing investment-linked tax deduction u/s 35AD in
respect of any specified business in any assessment year, is not
eligible for claiming profit-linked deduction under Chapter VI-A
or section 10AA for the same or any other A.Y. in respect of such
specified business if the assessee has claimed or opted for section
35AD and deduction thereunder has been allowed to him.
Asset to be used only for specified business for 8 years - Any
asset in respect of which a deduction is claimed and allowed
under section 35AD shall be used only for the specified
business, for a period of 8 years beginning with the previous year
in which such asset is acquired or constructed. If such asset is
used for any purpose other than the specified business, the total
amount of deduction so claimed and allowed u/s 35AD in any
previous year in respect of such asset, as reduced by the
depreciation allowable under section 32 as if no deduction had
been allowed under section 35AD, shall be deemed to be the
business income of the assessee of the previous year in which
the asset is so used.
Note – This deduction is not allowable under the default tax regime
u/s 115BAC.
35D Preliminary expenditure incurred by Indian companies and other
resident non-corporate assessees shall be allowed as deduction over
a period of 5 years beginning with the previous year in which
business commences or in which extension of the undertaking is
completed or the new unit commences operation or production.
Examples of Preliminary expenses – expenses on preparation of
project report, feasibility report, market survey, engineering
services, legal charges for drafting agreement.
In case of a Company, preliminary expenses would include, in
addition to the above, legal charges for drafting MOA, AOA,
printing of MOA and AOA, fee for registration of Co., expenditure
in connection with issue of shares or debentures of Co. (i.e.
underwriting commission, brokerage and charges for drafting,
typing, printing and advertisement of the prospectus)
Qualifying amount - Maximum aggregate amount of the
qualifying expenses that can be amortized is 5% of the cost of
project (i.e., actual cost of fixed assets in the books of account on
the last day of the P.Y.).
In case of an Indian company, 5% of the cost of project or at its
option, 5% of the capital employed by the company
(aggregate of issued share capital, debentures, long-term
borrowings as on the last day of the P.Y.), whichever is
higher.
35DDA One-fifth of the expenditure incurred by an assessee-employer
in any previous year in the form of payment to any employee in
connection with his voluntary retirement in accordance with a
scheme of voluntary retirement, shall be allowed as deduction in
that previous year and the balance in four equal installments in the
immediately four succeeding previous years.
36(1)(iii) Interest paid in respect of capital borrowed for the purposes
of business or profession.
However, any interest paid for acquisition of an asset (whether
capitalized in the books of account or not) for any period
beginning from the date on which the capital was borrowed for
acquisition of the asset till the date on which such asset was first
put to use, shall not be allowed as deduction. Such amount of
interest would be added to the actual cost of asset.
36(1)(iv) Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of
contribution towards a recognized provident fund or approved
superannuation fund.
36(1)(iva) Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of
contribution towards a pension scheme referred to in section
80CCD, to the extent of 14% of salary of any employee. Salary
includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide.
Correspondingly, section 40A(9) disallows the sum paid in excess of
14% of the salary of any employee.
36(1)(v) Any sum paid by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution
towards an approved gratuity fund created by him for the exclusive
benefit of his employees under an irrevocable trust.
36(1)(va) Amount received by assessee-employer as contribution from his
employees towards their welfare fund to be allowed as deduction
only if such amount is credited by the assessee to the
employee’s account in the relevant fund on or before due date
under the relevant Act/Rule/order/notification. Amount credited
after the said due date but on or before the due date under section
139(1) would not be eligible for deduction.
36(1)(vii) Any bad debts written off as irrecoverable in the accounts of
the assessee for the previous year, provided the debt has been
taken into account in computing the income of the previous
year or any earlier previous year.
Amount of debt taken into account in computing the income of
the assessee on the basis of notified ICDSs to be allowed as
deduction in the previous year in which such debt or part thereof
becomes irrecoverable. If a debt, which has not been recognized
in the books of account as per the requirement of the accounting
standards but has been taken into account in the computation of
income as per the notified ICDSs, has become irrecoverable, it can
still be claimed as bad debts under section 36(1)(vii) since it shall
be deemed that the debt has been written off as irrecoverable in
the books of account by virtue of the second proviso to section
36(1)(vii). This is because some ICDSs require recognition of
income at an earlier point of time (prior to the point of time such
income is recognised in the books of account). Consequently, if
the whole or part of such income recognised at an earlier point of
time for tax purposes becomes irrecoverable, it can be claimed as
bad debts on account of the second proviso to section 36(1)(vii).
36(1)(ix) Any bona fide expenditure incurred by a company for the
purpose of promoting family planning amongst its employees.
In case the expenditure or part thereof is of capital nature, one-
fifth of such expenditure shall be deducted for the previous year
in which it was incurred; and the balance in four equal
installments in four succeeding previous years.
Family planning expenses, whether revenue or capital, is not
allowable as deduction for non-corporate assesses, like
individuals, HUFs, firms, LLPs.
36(1)(xv) An amount equal to the securities transaction tax (STT) paid by
the assessee in respect of taxable securities transactions entered
into in the course of his business during the previous year, if the
income arising from such taxable securities transactions is
included in the income computed under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”.
36(1)(xvi) An amount equal to commodities transaction tax (CTT) paid in
respect of taxable commodities transactions entered into the
course of business during the previous year, if the income
arising from such taxable commodities transactions is
included in the income computed under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession”.
General
37(1) An expenditure shall be allowed under section 37, provided:
• it is not in the nature of expenditure described under sections
30 to 36;
• it is not in the nature of capital expenditure;
• it is not a personal expenditure of the assessee;
• it is laid out and expended wholly and exclusively for the
purpose of business/profession;
• it is not incurred for any purpose which is an offence or which
is prohibited by law; and
• it is not an expenditure incurred by the assessee on CSR activities
referred to in section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013.
Expenditure incurred for any purpose which is an offence or which is
prohibited by law” would include and would be deemed to have
always included the expenditure incurred by an assessee, -
(i) for any purpose which is an offence under any law for the time
being in force, in India or outside India or which is prohibited
by any law for the time being in force, in India or outside India; or
(ii) to provide any benefit or perquisite to a person, whether or not
carrying on a business or exercising a profession, and
acceptance of such benefit or perquisite by such person is in
violation of any law or rule or regulation or guidelines, as the
case may be, for the time being in force, governing the conduct
of such person; or
(iii) to compound an offence under any law for the time being in
force, in India or outside India; or
(iv) to settle proceedings initiated in relation to contravention
under such law as may be notified by the Central Government
in this behalf.
37(2B) Any expenditure incurred for advertisement in any souvenir,
brochure, tract, pamphlet etc. published by a political party is
not allowable as deduction.
Amounts not deductible
Section Particulars
In the hands of any assessee
40(a)(i) Any interest, royalty, fees for technical services or other sum chargeable
under the Act, which is payable outside India or in India to a non
corporate non-resident or to a foreign company, on which tax
deductible at source has not been deducted or after deduction has
not been paid on or before the due date specified u/s 139(1).
However, if such tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or
has been deducted in the previous year but paid in the subsequent
year after the due date specified under section 139(1), such sum
shall be allowed as deduction in computing the income of the
previous year in which such tax is paid.
40(a)(ia) 30% of any sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible
at source under Chapter XVII-B and such tax has not been
deducted or, after deduction has not been paid on or before the
due date for filing of return of income u/s 139(1).
However, if such tax has been deducted in any subsequent year or
has been deducted in the previous year but paid in the subsequent
year after the due date specified under section 139(1), 30% of such
sum shall be allowed as deduction in computing the income of the
previous year in which such tax is paid.
40(a)(ii) Any sum paid on account of income-tax including surcharge or cess
40(a)(iii) Any payment chargeable under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable
outside India or to a non-resident, if tax has not been paid
thereon nor deducted therefrom
40(a)(v) Tax paid by the employer on non-monetary perquisites provided
to its employees, which is exempt under section 10(10CC) in the
hands of the employee.
In case of partnership firms or LLPs -
40(b) (i) Salary, bonus, commission or remuneration, by whatever
name called, paid to any partner who is not a working
partner;
(ii) Payment of remuneration to a working partner or interest to
any partner, which is not –
• authorized by the partnership deed; or
• in accordance with the terms of the partnership deed.
(iii) Payment of remuneration to a working partner or interest to
any partner authorized by and in accordance with the terms
of the partnership deed, but relates to a period falling prior
to the date of such partnership and is not authorized by the
earlier partnership deed.
(iv) Payment of interest to any partner authorised by and in
accordance with the terms of the partnership deed and falling
after the date of the partnership deed to the extent of the
excess of the amount calculated at 12% simple interest per
annum.
(v) Payment of remuneration to a working partner which is
authorized by and in accordance with the partnership deed to
the extent the aggregate of such payment to working
partners exceed the following limits -
(a) On the first ` 6,00,000 of ` 3,00,000 or 90% of the
the book-profit or in case book-profit, whichever is
of a loss more.
(b) On the balance of book- 60%
profit
Meaning of Book profit:
Book profit means the net profit as shown in the P & L A/c for the
relevant previous year computed in accordance with the provisions
for computing income from profits and gains.
The above amount should be increased by the remuneration paid
or payable to all partners of the firm if the same has been deducted
while computing net profit.
Expenses or payments not deductible in certain circumstances
Section Particulars
40A(2) Any expenditure incurred in respect of which a payment is made to a
related person or entity, to the extent it is considered excessive or
unreasonable by the Assessing Officer.
Few examples of related persons are as under:
Assessee Related Person
Individual Any relative of the individual (husband or wife,
brother or sister, any lineal ascendant or
descendant of the individual)
Firm Any partner of the firm or relative of such partner
HUF or AOP Any member of the AOP or HUF or any relative of
such member
Company Director of the company or any relative of the
director
Any assessee Any individual who has a substantial interest
(20% or more voting power or beneficial
entitlement to 20% of profits) in the business or
profession of the assessee; or
A relative of such individual.
40A(3) Any expenditure, in respect of which a payment or aggregate of
payments made to a person in a single day otherwise than by
account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or ECS through
bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes
exceeds ` 10,000.
In case of payments made to transport operator for plying, hiring or
leasing goods carriages, an enhanced limit of ` 35,000 shall apply.
If the payment/payments exceed this limit, the entire expenditure
would be disallowed.
However, disallowance would not be attracted if the cases and
circumstances in which payment is made otherwise than by way of an
account payee cheque or bank draft are covered in Rule 6DD.
Few Examples of exceptions covered in Rule 6DD:
Payment to RBI, SBI, Co-operative banks
Payment made to Government, which according to its Rules, has to
be made in legal tender
Payment for purchase of agricultural produce, forest produce, fish
and fish products, productions of horticulture or apiculture to the
cultivator, grower or producer of such produce or products.
40A(3A) Where an expenditure has been allowed as deduction on accrual
basis in any previous year, and payment is made in a subsequent
previous year otherwise than by account payee cheque or account
payee bank draft or ECS through bank account or through such other
prescribed electronic modes and such payment (or aggregate of
payments made to a person in a day is made in a subsequent
previous year) is in excess of the limits of ` 10,000/ ` 35,000 specified
above, the payment/aggregate of payments so made shall be
deemed as profits and gains of the business or profession and
charged to tax as income of the subsequent previous year.
However, the deeming provision will not apply in the cases and
circumstances covered in Rule 6DD.
40A(7) Provision for payment of gratuity to employees.
However, disallowance would not be attracted if provision is made
for contribution to approved gratuity fund or for payment of
gratuity that has become payable during the year.
Profits chargeable to tax [Section 41]
41(1) Where deduction was allowed in respect of loss, expenditure or trading
liability for any year and subsequently, during any previous year, the
assessee or successor of the business has obtained any amount in
respect of such loss or expenditure or some benefit in respect of such
trading liability by way of remission or cessation thereof, the amount
obtained or the value of benefit accrued shall be deemed to be
income of the P.Y. in which such benefit was obtained.
41(3) Amount realized on transfer of an asset used for scientific
research without being used for other purposes is taxable as
business income in the year of sale to the extent of lower of
deduction allowed under section 35(1)(iv) and sale proceeds
41(4) Any amount recovered by the assessee against bad debt earlier
allowed as deduction shall be taxed as income in the year in which it
is received.
Certain Deductions to be allowed only on Actual Payment [Section 43B]
In respect of the following sums payable by an assessee during the P.Y.,
deduction is allowable only if the sum is actually paid on or before the due
date of filing of return u/s 139(1) for the said P.Y. Otherwise, the same would
be allowed only in the year in which the sum is actually paid.
(i) Tax, duty, cess or fee, under any law for the time being in force; or
(ii) Contribution to any provident fund or superannuation fund or
gratuity fund or any other fund for the welfare of employees; or
(iii) Bonus or commission for services rendered by employees, where such
sum would not have been payable to him as profits or dividend if it had
not been paid as bonus or commission; or
(iv) Interest on any loan or borrowing from any public financial
institution or a State Financial Corporation or a State Industrial
Investment Corporation, in accordance with the terms and conditions
of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing; or
(v) Interest on any loan or borrowing from notified class of non-
banking financial companies, in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the agreement governing such loan or borrowing
(vi) Interest on any loan or advance from a scheduled bank or co-
operative bank other than a primary agricultural credit society or a
primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing
such loan or advances; or
(vii) Payment in lieu of any leave at the credit of his employee.
(viii) Any sum payable to the Indian Railways for use of Railway assets.
However, any sum payable by the assessee to a micro or small enterprise
beyond the time-limit specified in section 15 of the Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 would be allowed as
deduction only in the P.Y. in which the sum is actually paid.
Section 15 of the of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
Act, 2006 mandates payment of goods or services to supplier, being a micro or
small enterprises on or before the date as per the written agreement, which
cannot be more than 45 days. If there is no such written agreement, the
payment shall be made before the appointed day i.e., within 15 days.
If the sum is paid within the said period, deduction would be allowed in the
year of accrual. If it is paid after the said period, then, deduction would be
allowed only in the year of actual payment, even if it is paid on or before the
due date of filing return of income u/s 139(1).
Other Provisions
Section Particulars
43CA Where the consideration for the transfer of an asset (other than
capital asset), being land or building or both, is less than the stamp
duty value, the value so adopted or assessed or assessable (i.e., the
stamp duty value) shall be deemed to be the full value of the
consideration for the purposes of computing income under the head
“Profits and gains of business or profession”.
However, if the stamp duty value does not exceed 110% of the actual
consideration received or accruing then, such consideration shall be
deemed to be the full value of consideration for the purpose of
computing profits and gains from transfer of such asset.
Further, where the date of an agreement fixing the value of
consideration for the transfer of the asset and the date of
registration of the transfer of the asset are not same, the stamp duty
value may be taken as on the date of the agreement for transfer
instead of on the date of registration for such transfer, provided at
least a part of the consideration has been received by way of an
account payee cheque/ account payee bank draft or use of ECS
through a bank account or through such other prescribed electronic
modes on or before the date of the agreement.
44AB Mandatory audit of accounts of certain persons
Category of person Condition for applicability of section
44AB
(1) (2) (3)
I In case of a person
carrying on business
(a) In case of a person If his total sales, turnover or gross receipts
carrying on business in business > ` 1 crore in the relevant PY.
Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB
does not apply to a person who declares
profits and gains for the previous year on
presumptive basis u/s 44AD(1).
If in case of such person If his total sales, turnover or gross receipts
carrying on business – in business > ` 10 crore in the relevant PY
(i) Aggregate cash
receipts in the
relevant PY ≤ 5% of
total receipts (incl.
receipts for sales,
turnover, gross
receipts); and
(ii) Aggregate cash
payments in the
relevant PY ≤ 5% of
total payments (incl.
amount incurred for
expenditure)
Note – For this purpose, the payment or receipt, as the case may be,
by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not
account payee, would be deemed to be the payment or receipt, as
the case may be, in cash.
(b) In case of an assessee If such assessee claims that the profits
covered u/s 44AE i.e., an and gains from business in the relevant
assessee engaged in the P.Y. are lower than the profits and gains
business of plying, computed on a presumptive basis u/s
hiring or leasing goods 44AE [i.e., ` 1000 per ton of gross vehicle
carriages who owns not weight or unladen weight in case of each
more than 10 goods heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 for each
carriages at any time vehicle, other than heavy goods vehicle,
during the P.Y. for every month or part of the month for
which the vehicle is owned by the
assessee].
(c) In case of an eligible If he declares profit for any of the five
assessee carrying on successive PYs (say, P.Y.2024-25) not in
business, whose total accordance with section 44AD (i.e., he
turnover, sales, gross declares profits lower than 8% or 6% of
receipts ≤ ` 200 lakhs, total turnover, sales or gross receipts, as
and who has opted for the case may be, in that year), then, he
section 44AD in any cannot opt for section 44AD for five
earlier PY (say, P.Y. successive PYs after the year of such
2023-24) default (i.e., from P.Y.2025-26 to P.Y.2029-
30). For the year of default (i.e., P.Y.
In case of an eligible
2024-25) and five successive previous
assessee carrying on
years (i.e., P.Y.2025-26 to P.Y.2029-30), he
business, whose
aggregate cash receipts has to maintain books of account u/s
in the relevant PY ≤ 5% 44AA and get them audited u/s 44AB, if
of total turnover or his income exceeds the basic exemption
gross receipts and limit.
whose total turnover,
sales, gross receipts ≤
` 300 lakhs, and who
has opted for section
44AD in any earlier PY
(say, P.Y.2023-24)
II In case of persons
carrying on profession
(a) In case of a person If his gross receipts in profession > ` 50
carrying on profession lakh in the relevant PY
Note – The requirement of audit u/s 44AB
does not apply to a person who declares
profits and gains for the previous year on
presumptive basis u/s 44ADA(1).
(b) In case of an assessee If such resident assessee claims that the
carrying on a notified profits and gains from such profession in
profession under the relevant PY are lower than the profits
section 44AA(1) i.e., and gains computed on a presumptive
legal medical, basis u/s 44ADA (50% of gross receipts) and
engineering, his income exceeds the basic exemption
accountancy, limit in that PY.
architecture, interior
decoration, technical
consultancy, whose
gross receipts ≤ ` 50
lakhs.
In case of an assessee
carrying on a notified
profession under
section 44AA(1) i.e.,
legal medical,
engineering,
accountancy,
architecture, interior
decoration, technical
consultancy, whose
aggregate cash receipts
in the relevant PY ≤ 5%
of total gross receipts
and whose gross
receipts ≤ ` 75 lakhs.
Presumptive Income provisions
Section Particulars Deemed profits and gains
44AD Any individual, HUF or 8% of gross receipts or total turnover or
firm who is a resident such higher sum claimed to have been
(other than LLP) who earned by him
has not claimed However, the presumptive income would
deduction under section be 6% (instead of 8%) of total turnover or
10AA or Chapter VI-A sales, in respect of amount which is
under the heading “C – received
Deductions in respect of • by an account payee cheque or
certain incomes”
• by an account payee bank draft or
engaged in any business
• by use of electronic clearing system
(except the business of
through a bank account or
plying, hiring or leasing
• through such other prescribed
goods carriages referred
electronic modes
to in section 44AE) and
whose total turnover or during the previous year or before the
gross receipts in the due date of filing of return u/s 139(1)
previous year does not in respect of that previous year.
exceed ` 2 crore.
If aggregate cash
receipts in the relevant
PY ≤ 5% of total
turnover or gross
receipts of the assessee,
higher turnover
threshold of ` 3 crore
would be applicable.
Non-applicability of
section 44AD
This section will not
apply to –
(i) a person carrying
on specified
professions
referred to in
section 44AA(1),
(ii) a person earning
income in the
nature of
commission or
brokerage;
(iii) a person carrying
on agency
business.
44ADA An assessee, being an 50% of the gross receipts or such higher
individual or a sum claimed to have been earned by him.
partnership firm (other
than LLP) resident in
India, who is engaged –
in any profession
referred to in section
44AA(1) such as legal,
medical, engineering or
architectural profession
or the profession of
accountancy or
technical consultancy or
interior decoration or
any other profession as
is notified by the Board
in the Official Gazette;
and whose total gross
receipts does not
exceed ` 50 lakhs in a
previous year.
If aggregate cash
receipts in the relevant
PY ≤ 5% of total
turnover or gross
receipts of the assessee,
a higher gross receipts
threshold of ` 75 lakhs
would be applicable.
44AE Any assessee who owns For each heavy goods vehicle,
not more than ten ` 1,000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or
goods carriages at any unladen weight, as the case may be, for
time during the every month or part of a month during
previous year and who which the vehicle is owned by the assessee.
is engaged in the
For each vehicle, other than heavy goods
business of plying, vehicle, ` 7,500 per month or part of a
hiring and leasing
month during which such vehicle is owned
goods carriages.
by the assessee (or) an amount claimed to
have been actually earned from such
vehicle, whichever is higher.
Taxability in case of composite income
In cases where income is derived from the sale of rubber manufactured or
processed from rubber plants grown by the seller in India, coffee grown and
cured/grown, cured, roasted and grounded by the seller in India, or tea grown
and manufactured by the seller in India, the income shall be computed as if it were
income derived from business, and a specified percentage of such income, as
given in the table below, shall be deemed to be income liable to tax -
Rule Nature of composite income Business Agricultural
income Income
(Taxable) (Exempt)
7A Income from sale of rubber products 35% 65%
derived from rubber plants grown by
the seller in India
7B Income from sale of coffee
- grown and cured by the seller in 25% 75%
India
- grown, cured, roasted and
40% 60%
grounded by the seller in India
8 Income from sale of tea grown and 40% 60%
manufactured by the seller in India
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Venus., engaged in manufacture of pesticides, furnishes the following
particulars relating to its manufacturing unit at Chennai, for the year ending
31-3-2025:
(` in lakhs)
WDV of Plant and Machinery on 31.3.2024 30.00
Depreciation including additional depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 4.75
New machinery purchased on 1-9-2024 10.00
New machinery purchased on 1-12-2024 8.00
Computer purchased on 3-1-2025 4.00
Additional information:
• All assets were purchased by A/c payee cheque.
• All assets were put to use immediately.
• New machinery purchased on 1-12-2024 and computer have been
installed in the office.
• During the year ended 31-3-2024, a new machinery had been
purchased on 31-10-2023, for ` 10 lakhs. Additional depreciation,
besides normal depreciation, had been claimed thereon.
• Depreciation rate for machinery may be taken as 15%.
• The assessee has no brought forward business loss or unabsorbed
depreciation as on 1.4.2024.
Compute the depreciation available to the assessee as per the provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the WDV of different blocks of assets as on 31-
3-2025 if -
(i) he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)
(ii) he pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
2. Mr. Abhimanyu is engaged in the business of generation and distribution of
electric power. He opts to claim depreciation on written down value for
income-tax purposes. From the following details, compute the depreciation
allowable as per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the
A.Y. 2025-26, assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A):
Particulars (` in lakhs)
(i) WDV of block as on 31.3.2024 (15% rate) 50.00
(ii) Depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 7.50
(iii) New machinery purchased on 12-10-2024 10.00
(iv) Machinery imported from Colombo on 12-4-2024. 9.00
This machine had been used only in Colombo earlier
and the assessee is the first user in India.
(v) New computer installed in generation wing unit on 2.00
15-7-2024
All assets were purchased by A/c payee cheque.
3. Examine with reasons, the allowability of the following expenses incurred by
Mr. Manav, a wholesale dealer of commodities, under the Income-tax Act,
1961 while computing profit and gains from business or profession for the
A.Y. 2025-26 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) -
(i) Construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities
amounting to ` 5,60,000.
(ii) Purchase of building for the purpose of specified business of setting up
and operating a warehousing facility for storage of food grains
amounting to ` 4,50,000.
(iii) Interest on loan paid to Mr. X (a resident) ` 50,000 on which tax has not
been deducted. The sales for the P.Y. 2023-24 was ` 202 lakhs.
Mr. X has not paid the tax, if any, on such interest.
(iv) Commodities transaction tax paid ` 20,000 on sale of bullion.
4. Examine with reasons, for the following sub-divisions, whether the following
statements are true or false having regard to the provisions of the Income-tax
Act, 1961:
(i) For a dealer in shares and securities, securities transaction tax paid in a
recognized stock exchange is permissible business expenditure.
(ii) Where a person follows mercantile system of accounting, an
expenditure of ` 25,000 has been allowed on accrual basis and in a
later year, in respect of the said expenditure, assessee makes the
payment of ` 25,000 through a crossed cheque, ` 25,000 can be the
profits and gains of business under section 40A(3A) in the year of
payment.
(iii) It is mandatory to provide for depreciation under section 32 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, while computing income under the head “Profits
and Gains from Business and Profession”.
(iv) The mediclaim premium paid to GIC by Mr. Lomesh for his employees,
by an account payee cheque on 27.12.2024 is a deductible expenditure
under section 36.
(v) Under section 35DDA, amortization of expenditure incurred under
eligible Voluntary Retirement Scheme at the time of retirement alone,
can be done.
(vi) An individual engaged in trading activities and exercising the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A) can claim additional depreciation under section 32(1)(iia)
in respect of new plant acquired and installed in the trading concern,
where the increase in value of such plant as compared to the approved
base year is more than 10%.
5. Examine, with reasons, the allowability of the following expenses under the
Income-tax Act, 1961 while computing income from business or profession for
the A.Y. 2025-26:
(i) Provision made on the basis of actuarial valuation for payment of
gratuity ` 5,00,000. However, no payment on account of gratuity was
made before due date of filing return.
(ii) Purchase of oil seeds of ` 50,000 in cash from a farmer on a banking
day.
(iii) Tax on non-monetary perquisite provided to an employee ` 20,000.
(iv) Payment of ` 50,000 by using credit card for fire insurance.
(v) Salary payment of ` 10,00,000 to Mr. X outside India by a company
without deduction of tax assuming Mr. X has not paid tax on such salary
income.
(vi) Payment made in cash ` 30,000 to a transporter in a day for carriage of
goods.
6. Examine with reasons, whether the following statements are true or false,
with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:
(a) Payment made in respect of a business expenditure incurred on 16th
February, 2025 for ` 25,000 through a crossed cheque is hit by the
provisions of section 40A(3).
(b) (i) It is a condition precedent to write off in the books of account, the
amount due from debtor to claim deduction for bad debt.
(ii) Failure to deduct tax at source in accordance with the provisions
of Chapter XVII-B, inter alia, from the amounts payable to a non-
resident as rent or royalty, will result in disallowance while
computing the business income where the non-resident payee has
not paid the tax due on such income.
7. Mr. Sivam, a retail trader of Cochin gives the following Trading and Profit and
Loss Account for the year ended 31st March, 2025:
Trading and Profit and Loss Account for the year ended 31.03.2025
Particulars ` Particulars `
To Opening stock 90,000 By Sales 1,12,11,500
To Purchases 1,10,04,000 By Closing stock 1,86,100
To Gross Profit 3,03,600 -
1,13,97,600 1,13,97,600
To Salary 60,000 By Gross profit b/d 3,03,600
To Rent and rates 36,000 By Income from UTI 2,400
To Interest on loan 15,000
To Depreciation 1,05,000
To Printing & stationery 23,200
To Postage & telegram 1,640
To Loss on sale of 8,100
shares (Short-term)
To Other general 7,060
expenses
To Net Profit 50,000
3,06,000 3,06,000
Additional Information:
(i) It was found that some stocks were omitted to be included in both the
Opening and Closing Stock, the values of which were:
Opening stock ` 9,000
Closing stock ` 18,000
(ii) Salary includes ` 10,000 paid to his brother, which is unreasonable to
the extent of ` 2,000.
(iii) The whole amount of printing and stationery was paid in cash by way of
one-time payment to Mr. Ramesh.
(iv) The depreciation provided in the Profit and Loss Account ` 1,05,000 was
based on the following information:
The opening balance of plant and machinery (i.e., the written down value
as on 31.3.2024 minus depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24) is ` 4,20,000. A new
plant falling under the same block of depreciation was bought on
01.7.2024 for ` 70,000. Two old plants were sold on 1.10.2024 for ` 50,000.
(v) Rent and rates includes GST liability of ` 3,400 paid on 7.4.2025.
(vi) Other general expenses include ` 2,000 paid as donation to a Public
Charitable Trust.
You are required to compute the profits and gains of Mr. Sivam under
presumptive taxation u/s 44AD and profits and gains as per the regular
provisions of the Act assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Assume that the
whole of the amount of turnover received by account payee cheque or use of
electronic clearing system through bank account during the previous year.
8. Mr. Sukhvinder is engaged in the business of plying goods carriages. On
1st April, 2024, he owns 10 trucks (out of which 6 are heavy goods vehicles,
the gross vehicle weight of such goods vehicle is 15,000 kg each). On 2nd May,
2024, he sold one of the heavy goods vehicles and purchased a light goods
vehicle on 6th May, 2024. This new vehicle could, however, be put to use only
on 15th June, 2024.
Compute the total income of Mr. Sukhvinder for the A.Y. 2025-26, taking note
of the following data:
Particulars ` `
Freight charges collected 12,70,000
Less: Operational expenses 6,25,000
Depreciation as per section 32 1,85,000
Other office expenses 15,000 8,25,000
Net Profit 4,45,000
Other business and non-business income 70,000
9. Mr. Raju, a manufacturer at Chennai, gives the following Manufacturing,
Trading and Profit & Loss Account for the year ended 31.03.2025:
Manufacturing, Trading and Profit & Loss Account
for the year ended 31.03.2025
Particulars ` Particulars `
To Opening Stock 71,000 By Sales 2,32,00,000
To Purchase of Raw 2,16,99,000 By Closing stock 2,00,000
Materials
To Manufacturing 5,70,000
Wages & Expenses
To Gross Profit 10,60,000
2,34,00,000 2,34,00,000
To Administrative 3,26,000 By Gross Profit 10,60,000
charges
To SGST penalty 5,000 By Dividend from 15,000
domestic
companies
To GST paid 1,10,000 By Income from 1,80,000
agriculture (net)
To General Expenses 54,000
To Interest to Bank 60,000
(On machinery
term loan)
To Depreciation 2,00,000
To Net Profit 5,00,000
12,55,000 12,55,000
Following are the further information relating to the financial year 2024-25:
(i) Administrative charges include ` 46,000 paid as commission to brother
of the assessee. The commission amount at the market rate is ` 36,000.
(ii) The assessee paid ` 33,000 in cash to a transport carrier on 29.12.2024.
This amount is included in manufacturing expenses. (Assume that the
provisions relating to TDS are not applicable to this payment)
(iii) A sum of ` 4,000 per month was paid as salary to a staff throughout the
year and this has not been recorded in the books of account.
(iv) Bank term loan interest actually paid upto 31.03.2025 was ` 20,000 and
the balance was paid in November 2025.
(v) Housing loan principal repaid during the year was ` 50,000 and it relates
to residential property acquired by him in P.Y. 2023-24 for self-occupation.
Interest on housing loan was ` 23,000. Housing loan was taken from
Canara Bank. These amounts were not dealt with in the profit and loss
account given above.
(vi) Depreciation allowable under the Act is to be computed on the basis of
following information:
Plant & Machinery (Depreciation rate@15%) `
WDV as on 31.03.2024 minus Depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 11,90,000
Additions during the year (used for more than 180 days) 2,00,000
Total additions during the year 4,00,000
Compute the total income of Mr. Raju for the A.Y. 2025-26 assuming he pays
tax under default tax regime.
Note: Ignore application of section 14A for disallowance of expenditures in
respect of any exempt income.
10. Mr. Tenzingh is engaged in composite business of growing and curing (further
processing) coffee in Coorg, Karnataka. The whole of coffee grown in his
plantation is cured. Relevant information pertaining to the year ended 31.3.2025
are given below:
Particulars `
Opening balance of car (only asset in the block) as on 1.4.2024 3,00,000
(i.e. WDV as on 31.3.2024 (-) depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24)
Opening balance of machinery as on 1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV as on 15,00,000
31.3.2024 (-) depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24)
Expenses incurred for growing coffee 3,10,000
Expenditure for curing coffee 3,00,000
Sale value of cured coffee 22,00,000
Besides being used for agricultural operations, the car is also used for
personal use; disallowance for personal use may be taken at 20%. The
expenses incurred for car running and maintenance are ` 50,000. The
machines were used in coffee curing business operations.
Compute the income arising from the above activities for the A.Y. 2025-26.
ANSWERS
1. Computation of written down value of block of assets of
Venus Ltd. as on 31.3.2025
Particulars Plant & Computer
Machinery
(` in lakhs) (` in lakhs)
Written down value (as on 31.3.2024) 30.00 Nil
Less: Depreciation including additional 4.75 -
depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24
Opening balance as on 1.4.2024 25.25
Add: Actual cost of new assets acquired
during the year
New machinery purchased on 1.9.2024 10.00 -
New machinery purchased on 1.12.2024 8.00 -
Computer purchased on 3.1.2025 - 4.00
43.25 4.00
Less: Assets sold/discarded/destroyed Nil Nil
during the year
Written Down Value (as on 31.03.2025) 43.25 4.00
(i) If Mr. Venus exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)
In this case, since his income would be computed under the optional tax
regime as per the normal provisions of the Act, he would be entitled for normal
depreciation and additional depreciation, subject to fulfilment of conditions.
Computation of depreciation for A.Y. 2025-26
Plant & Computer
Particulars Machinery
(` in lakhs) (` in lakhs)
I. Assets put to use for more than 180
days, eligible for 100% depreciation
calculated applying the eligible rate
of normal depreciation and
additional depreciation
Normal Depreciation
- WDV of plant and machinery 3.79 -
(` 25.25 lakhs x 15%)
- New Machinery purchased on 1.50 -
1.9.2024 (` 10 lakhs x 15%)
(A) 5.29 -
Additional Depreciation
New Machinery purchased on 2.00 -
1.9.2024 (` 10 lakhs x 20%)
Balance additional depreciation in 1.00
respect of new machinery purchased
on 31.10.2023 and put to use for less
than 180 days in the P.Y. 2023-24
(` 10 lakhs x 20% x 50%)
(B) 3.00
II. Assets put to use for less than 180
days, eligible for 50% depreciation
calculated applying the eligible rate
of normal depreciation and
additional depreciation, if any
Normal Depreciation
New machinery purchased on 0.60 -
1.12.2024 [` 8 lakhs x 7.5% (i.e., 50%
of 15%)]
Computer purchased on 3.1.2024
[` 4 lakhs x 20% (50% of 40%)] - 0.80
(C) 0.60 0.80
Total Depreciation (A+B+C) 8.89 0.80
Notes:
(1) As per section 32(1)(iia), additional depreciation is allowable in the
case of any new machinery or plant acquired and installed after
31.3.2005, by an assessee engaged, inter alia, in the business of
manufacture or production of any article or thing, at the rate of 20%
of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.
However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of,
inter alia,–
(i) any office appliances or road transport vehicles;
(ii) any machinery or plant installed in, inter alia, office premises.
In view of the above provisions, additional depreciation cannot be
claimed in respect of -
(i) Machinery purchased on 1.12.2024, installed in office and
(ii) Computer purchased on 3.1.2025, installed in office.
(2) Balance additional depreciation@10% on new plant or machinery
acquired and put to use for less than 180 days in the year of
acquisition which has not been allowed in that year, shall be allowed
in the immediately succeeding previous year.
Hence, in this case, the balance additional depreciation@10% (i.e., ` 1
lakhs, being 10% of ` 10 lakhs) in respect of new machinery which had
been purchased during the previous year 2023-24 and put to use for
less than 180 days in that year can be claimed in P.Y. 2024-25 being
immediately succeeding previous year.
(i) If Mr. Venus pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
In this case, under the default tax regime as per section 115BAC, he would
be entitled only for normal depreciation but not additional depreciation.
Computation of depreciation for A.Y. 2025-26
Plant & Computer
Particulars Machinery (` in
(` in lakhs) lakhs)
I. Assets put to use for more than 180
days, eligible for 100% depreciation
calculated applying the eligible rate of
normal depreciation
Normal Depreciation
- WDV of plant and machinery 3.79 -
(` 25.25 lakhs x 15%)
- New Machinery purchased on 1.50 -
1.9.2024 (` 10 lakhs x 15%)
(A) 5.29 -
II. Assets put to use for less than 180 days,
eligible for 50% depreciation calculated
applying the eligible rate of normal
depreciation
Normal Depreciation
New machinery purchased on 1.12.2024 0.60 -
[` 8 lakhs x 7.5% (i.e., 50% of 15%)]
Computer purchased on 3.1.2023 [` 4
lakhs x 20% (50% of 40%)] - 0.80
(C) 0.60 0.80
Total Depreciation (A+B+C) 5.89 0.80
2. Computation of depreciation under section 32 for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Normal Depreciation
Depreciation@15% on ` 51,50,000, being 7,72,500
machinery put to use for more than 180 days
[WDV as on 31.3.2024 of ` 50,00,000 – Depreciation
for P.Y. 2023-24 of ` 7,50,000+ Purchase cost of
imported machinery of ` 9,00,000]
Depreciation@7.5% on ` 10,00,000, being new
machinery put to use for less than 180 days 75,000
8,47,500
Depreciation@40% on computers purchased 80,000 9,27,500
` 2,00,000
Additional Depreciation (Refer Note below)
Additional Depreciation@10% of ` 10,00,000 1,00,000
[being actual cost of new machinery purchased on
12-10-2024]
Additional Depreciation@20% on new computer
installed in generation wing of the unit [20% of
` 2,00,000] 40,000 1,40,000
Depreciation on Plant and Machinery 10,67,500
Note:-
Mr. Abhimanyu is eligible for additional depreciation since he has exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). The benefit of additional depreciation is available to new plant
and machinery acquired and installed in power sector undertakings.
Accordingly, additional depreciation is allowable in the case of any new
machinery or plant acquired and installed by an assessee engaged, inter
alia, in the business of generation, transmission or distribution of power, at
the rate of 20% of the actual cost of such machinery or plant.
Therefore, new computer installed in generation wing units eligible for
additional depreciation@20%.
Since the new machinery was purchased only on 12.10.2024, it was put to
use for less than 180 days during the previous year, and hence, only 10%
(i.e., 50% of 20%) is allowable as additional depreciation in the A.Y.2025-26.
The balance additional depreciation would be allowed in the next year.
However, additional depreciation shall not be allowed in respect of, inter
alia, any machinery or plant which, before its installation by the assessee,
was used either within or outside India by any other person. Therefore,
additional depreciation is not allowable in respect of imported machinery,
since it was used in Colombo, before its installation by the assessee.
3. Allowability of the expenses incurred by Mr. Manav, a wholesale dealer
in commodities, while computing profits and gains from business or
profession
(i) Construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities
Under section 37(1), only expenditure not being in the nature of
capital expenditure or personal expense and not covered under
sections 30 to 36, and incurred wholly and exclusively for the purposes
of the business is allowed as a deduction while computing business
income.
However, any expenditure incurred by an assessee on the activities
relating to corporate social responsibility referred to in section 135 of
the Companies Act, 2013 shall not be deemed to have been incurred
for the purpose of business and hence, shall not be allowed as
deduction under section 37.
Accordingly, the amount of ` 5,60,000 incurred by Mr. Manav, towards
construction of school building in compliance with CSR activities shall
not be allowed as deduction under section 37.
(ii) Purchase of building for setting up and operating a warehousing
facility for storage of food grains
Mr. Manav, would be eligible for investment-linked tax deduction
under section 35AD, since he has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The
deduction u/s 35AD would be 100% of ` 4,50,000, being the amount
invested in purchase of building for setting up and operating a
warehousing facility for storage of food grains which commences
operation on or after 1st April, 2009 (P.Y.2024-25, in this case).
Therefore, the deduction under section 35AD while computing
business income of such specified business would be ` 4,50,000, if
Mr. Manav opts for section 35AD.
(iii) Interest on loan paid to Mr. X (a resident) ` 50,000 on which tax
has not been deducted
As per section 194A, Mr. Manav, being an individual is required to deduct
tax at source on the amount of interest on loan paid to Mr. X, since his
turnover during the previous year 2023-24 exceeds ` 100 lakhs.
Therefore, ` 15,000, being 30% of ` 50,000, would be disallowed under
section 40(a)(ia) while computing the business income of Mr. Manav
for non-deduction of tax at source under section 194A on interest of
` 50,000 paid by it to Mr. X.
The balance ` 35,000 would be allowed as deduction under section 36(1)(iii),
assuming that the amount was borrowed for the purposes of business.
(iv) Commodities transaction tax of ` 20,000 paid on sale of bullion
Commodities transaction tax paid in respect of taxable commodities
transactions entered into in the course of business during the previous
year is allowable as deduction, provided the income arising from such
taxable commodities transactions is included in the income computed
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
Taking that income from this commodities transaction is included
while computing the business income of Mr. Manav, the commodity
transaction tax of ` 20,000 paid is allowable as deduction under
section 36(1)(xvi).
4. (i) True: Section 36(1)(xv) allows a deduction of the amount of securities
transaction tax paid by the assessee in respect of taxable securities
transactions entered into in the course of business during the previous
year as deduction from the business income of a dealer in shares and
securities.
(ii) True: As per section 40A(3A), in the case of an assessee following
mercantile system of accounting, if an expenditure has been allowed
as deduction in any previous year on due basis, and payment
exceeding ` 10,000 has been made in the subsequent year otherwise
than by an account payee cheque or an account payee bank draft or
use of ECS through a bank account or through such other prescribed
electronic modes such as credit card, debit card, net banking, IMPS,
UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay, then, the payment so made
shall be deemed to be the income of the subsequent year in which
such payment has been made.
(iii) True: According to the Explanation 5 to section 32(1), allowance of
depreciation is mandatory. Therefore, depreciation has to be provided
mandatorily while calculating income from business/ profession
whether or not the assessee has claimed the same while computing
his total income.
(iv) True: Section 36(1)(ib) provides deduction in respect of premium paid
by an employer to keep in force an insurance on the health of his
employees under a scheme framed in this behalf by GIC or any other
insurer. The medical insurance premium can be paid by any mode
other than cash, to be eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(ib).
(v) False: Expenditure incurred in making payment to the employee in
connection with his voluntary retirement either in the year of
retirement or in any subsequent year, will be entitled to deduction in 5
equal annual installments beginning from the year in which each
payment is made to the employee.
(vi) False: Additional depreciation can be claimed only in respect of
eligible plant and machinery acquired and installed by an assessee
engaged in the business of manufacture or production of any article
or thing or in the business of generation or transmission or
distribution of power.
In this case, the individual is engaged in trading activities and the new
plant has been acquired and installed in a trading concern. Hence, he
will not be entitled to claim additional depreciation under section
32(1)(iia), even though he has exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
5. (i) Not allowable as deduction: As per section 40A(7), no deduction is
allowed in computing business income in respect of any provision
made by the assessee in his books of account for the payment of
gratuity to his employees except in the following two cases:
(1) where any provision is made for the purpose of payment of sum
by way of contribution towards an approved gratuity fund; or
(2) where any provision is made for the purpose of making any
payment on account of gratuity that has become payable during
the previous year.
Therefore, in the present case, the provision made on the basis of
actuarial valuation for payment of gratuity has to be disallowed under
section 40A(7), since, no payment has been actually made on account
of gratuity.
Note: It is assumed that such provision is not for the purpose of
contribution towards an approved gratuity fund.
(ii) Allowable as deduction: As per Rule 6DD, in case the payment is
made for purchase of agricultural produce directly to the cultivator,
grower or producer of such agricultural produce, no disallowance
under section 40A(3) is attracted even though the cash payment for
the expense exceeds ` 10,000.
Therefore, in the given case, disallowance under section 40A(3) is not
attracted since, cash payment for purchase of oil seeds is made
directly to the farmer.
(iii) Not allowable as deduction: Income-tax of ` 20,000 paid by the
employer in respect of non-monetary perquisites provided to its
employees is exempt in the hands of the employee under section
10(10CC).
As per section 40(a)(v), such income-tax paid by the employer is not
deductible while computing business income.
(iv) Allowable as deduction: Payment for fire insurance is allowable as
deduction under section 36(1). Since payment is made by credit card,
which is a prescribed electronic mode, disallowance under section
40A(3) is not attracted in this case.
(v) Not allowable as deduction: Disallowance under section 40(a)(iii) is
attracted in respect of salary payment of ` 10,00,000 outside India by
a company without deduction of tax at source.
(vi) Allowable as deduction: The limit for attracting disallowance under
section 40A(3) for payment otherwise than by way of account payee
cheque or account payee bank draft or use of ECS through a bank
account or through such other prescribed electronic mode is ` 35,000
in case of payment made for plying, hiring or leasing goods carriage.
Therefore, in the present case, disallowance under section 40A(3) is
not attracted for payment of ` 30,000 made in cash to a transporter
for carriage of goods.
6. (a) True: In order to escape the disallowance specified in section 40A(3),
payment in respect of the business expenditure ought to have been
made through an account payee cheque. Payment through a crossed
cheque will attract disallowance under section 40A(3).
(b) (i) True: It is mandatory to write off the amount due from a debtor
as not receivable in the books of account, in order to claim the
same as bad debt under section 36(1)(vii). However, where the
debt has been taken into account in computing the income of
the assessee on the basis of ICDSs notified under section 145(2),
without recording the same in the accounts, then, such debt
shall be allowed in the previous year in which such debt
becomes irrecoverable and it shall be deemed that such debt or
part thereof has been written off as irrecoverable in the accounts
for the said purpose.
(ii) True: Section 40(a)(i) provides that failure to deduct tax at
source from, inter alia, rent or royalty payable to a non-resident,
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, will result in
disallowance of such expenditure, where the non-resident payee
has not paid the tax due on such income.
7. Computation of business income of Mr. Sivam for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Net Profit as per profit and loss account 50,000
Add: Inadmissible expenses/ losses
Under valuation of closing stock 18,000
Salary paid to brother – unreasonable 2,000
[Section 40A(2)]
Printing and stationery - whole amount of 23,200
printing & stationery paid in cash would be
disallowed, since such amount exceeds
` 10,000 [Section 40A(3)]
Depreciation (considered separately) 1,05,000
Short term capital loss on shares 8,100
Donation to public charitable trust 2,000 1,58,300
2,08,300
Less: Items to be deducted:
Under valuation of opening stock 9,000
Income from UTI [Chargeable under the 2,400 11,400
head “Income from Other Sources]
Business income before depreciation 1,96,900
Less: Depreciation (See Note 1) 66,000
1,30,900
Computation of business income as per section 44AD:
As per section 44AD, where the amount of turnover is received, inter alia, by
way of account payee cheque or use of electronic clearing system through
bank account or through such other prescribed electronic modes, the
presumptive business income would be 6% of turnover, i.e., ` 1,12,11,500 x
6 /100 = ` 6,72,690
Notes:
1. Calculation of depreciation
Particulars
`
Opening balance of plant & machinery as on 1.4.2024 4,20,000
(i.e. WDV as on 31.3.2024 (-) depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24)
Add: Cost of new plant & machinery 70,000
4,90,000
Less: Sale proceeds of assets sold 50,000
WDV of the block of plant & machinery as on 31.3.2025 4,40,000
Depreciation@15% 66,000
No additional depreciation is allowable as the assessee is
not engaged in manufacture or production of any article.
2. Since GST liability has been paid before the due date of filing return of
income under section 139(1), the same is deductible.
8. Section 44AE would apply in the case of Mr. Sukhvinder since he is engaged
in the business of plying goods carriages and owns not more than ten
goods carriages at any time during the previous year.
Section 44AE provides for computation of business income of such assesses
on a presumptive basis. The income shall be deemed to be ` 1,000 per ton
of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight, as the case may be, per month or
part of the month for each heavy goods vehicle and ` 7,500 per month or
part of month for each goods carriage other than heavy goods vehicle,
owned by the assessee in the previous year or such higher sum as declared
by the assessee in his return of income.
Mr. Sukhvinder’s business income calculated applying the provisions of
section 44AE is ` 13,72,500 (See Notes 1 & 2 below) and his total income
would be ` 14,42,500.
However, as per section 44AE(7), Mr. Sukhvinder may claim lower profits
and gains if he keeps and maintains proper books of account as per section
44AA and gets the same audited and furnishes a report of such audit as
required under section 44AB. If he does so, then his income for tax purposes
from goods carriages would be ` 4,45,000 instead of ` 13,72,500 and his
total income would be ` 5,15,000.
Notes:
1. Computation of total income of Mr. Sukhvinder for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Presumptive Where books
income are maintained
` `
Income from business of plying
goods carriages [See Note 2 13,72,500 4,45,000
Below]
Other business and non-business 70,000 70,000
income
Total Income 14,42,500 5,15,000
2. Calculation of presumptive income as per section 44AE
Type of carriage No. of Rate per ton Ton Amount
months per month/ `
per month
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Heavy goods
vehicle
1 goods carriage 2 1,000 15 30,000
upto 1st May (15,000/1,000)
5 goods carriage 12 1,000 15 9,00,000
held throughout (15,000/1,000)
the year
Goods vehicle
other than heavy
goods vehicle
1 goods carriage 11 7,500 - 82,500
from 6th May
4 goods carriage 12 7,500 - 3,60,000
held throughout
the year
Total 13,72,500
9. Computation of total income of Mr. Raju for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Profits and gains of business or profession
Net profit as per profit and loss account 5,00,000
Add: Excess commission paid to brother disallowed 10,000
under section 40A(2)
Disallowance under section 40A(3) is not Nil
attracted since the limit for one time cash
payment is ` 35,000 in respect of payment to
transport operators. Therefore, amount of
` 33,000 paid in cash to a transport carrier is
allowable as deduction.
Bank term loan interest paid after the due date 40,000
of filing of return under section 139(1) –
disallowed as per section 43B
State GST penalty paid disallowed [See Note 2 5,000
below]
Depreciation debited to profit and loss account 2,00,000 2,55,000
7,55,000
Less: Dividend from domestic companies 15,000
[Chargeable to tax under the head “Income
from Other Sources”]
Income from agriculture [Exempt under 1,80,000
section 10(1)]
Salary paid to staff not recorded in the books 48,000
(Assumed it was an erroneous omission and
that the assessee has offered satisfactory
explanation for the same. In such a case, the
same would be allowable as deduction while
computing profits and gains of business and
profession) [See Note 1 below]
Depreciation under the Income-tax Act, 1961
(As per working note) 2,23,500 4,66,500
2,88,500
Income from house property
Annual value of self-occupied property Nil
Less: Deduction u/s 24(b) – interest on housing loan Nil Nil
[Not allowable, since Mr. Raju is paying tax as
per default tax regime]
Income from Other Sources
Dividend from domestic companies 15,000
Gross Total Income 3,03,500
Less: Deduction u/s 80C [Not allowable, since
Mr. Raju is paying tax as per default tax regime] Nil
Total Income 3,03,500
Working Note:
Computation of depreciation under the Income-tax Act, 1961
Particulars
`
Depreciation@15% on ` 13.90 lakhs (WDV as on 31.3.2024 less
depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 i.e., ` 11.90 lakh plus assets 2,08,500
purchased during the year and used for more than 180 days ` 2
lakh)
Depreciation @7.5% on ` 2 lakh (Assets used for < 180 days) 15,000
2,23,500
Since Mr. Raju is paying tax as per default tax regime, additional
depreciation u/s 32(1)(iia) would not be available to him.
Notes (Alternate views):
1. It is also possible to take a view that the salary paid to staff not
recorded in the books is in the nature of unexplained expenditure and
hence, would be deemed to be income as per section 69C and would
be taxable @ 60% under section 115BBE. In such a case, no deduction
allowable in respect of such expenditure.
2. Where the imposition of penalty is not for delay in payment of sales
tax or VAT or GST but for contravention of provisions of the Sales Tax
Act or VAT Act or GST Law, the levy is not compensatory and
therefore, not deductible. However, if the levy is compensatory in
nature, it would be fully allowable. Where it is a composite levy, the
portion which is compensatory is allowable and that portion which is
penal is to be disallowed.
Since the question only mentions “GST penalty paid” and the reason
for levy of penalty is not given, it has been assumed that the levy is
not compensatory and therefore, not deductible. It is, however,
possible to assume that such levy is compensatory in nature and
hence, allowable as deduction. In such a case, the total income would
be ` 3,94,500.
10. Where an assessee is engaged in the composite business of growing and
curing of coffee, the income will be segregated between agricultural income
and business income, as per Rule 7B of the Income-tax Rules, 1962.
As per the above Rule, income derived from sale of coffee grown and cured
by the seller in India shall be computed as if it were income derived from
business, and 25% of such income shall be deemed to be income liable to
tax. The balance 75% will be treated as agricultural income.
Particulars
` `
Sale value of cured coffee 22,00,000
Less: Expenses for growing coffee 3,10,000
Car expenses (80% of ` 50,000) 40,000
Depreciation on car (80% of 15% of
` 3,00,000) [See Computation below] 36,000
Total cost of agricultural operations 3,86,000
Expenditure on coffee curing 3,00,000
operations
Add: Depreciation on machinery 2,25,000
(15% of ` 15,00,000)
[See Computation below]
Total cost of the curing operations 5,25,000
Total cost of composite operations 9,11,000
Total profits from composite activities 12,89,000
Business income (25% of above) 3,22,250
Agricultural income (75% of above) 9,66,750
Computation of depreciation for P.Y. 2024-25
Particulars
` `
Car
Opening balance as on 1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV as on 3,00,000
31.3.2024 (-) depreciation for P.Y.2023-24)
Depreciation thereon at 15% 45,000
Less: Disallowance @20% for personal use 9,000
Depreciation actually allowed 36,000
Machinery
Opening balance as on 1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV as on 15,00,000
31.3.2024 (-) depreciation for P.Y.2023-24)
Depreciation @ 15% for P.Y. 2024-25 2,25,000
Explanation 7 to section 43(6) provides that in cases of ‘composite income’,
for the purpose of computing written down value of assets acquired before
the previous year, the total amount of depreciation shall be computed as if
the entire composite income of the assessee (and not just 25%) is
chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
The depreciation so computed shall be deemed to have been “actually
allowed” to the assessee.
UNIT – 4 : CAPITAL GAINS
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to –
♦ comprehend the scope of income chargeable under this head;
♦ comprehend and identify the assets classified as “capital assets” for the
purposes of chargeability under this head;
♦ comprehend the meaning of short-term capital asset and long-term capital asset;
♦ compute the period of holding for determining whether an asset is a short-
term capital asset or long-term capital asset;
♦ identify the transactions to be considered as transfer for the purpose of
capital gains;
♦ identify the transactions not regarded as transfer;
♦ compute the capital gains from transfer of capital assets in the manner
prescribed;
♦ determine the cost of acquisition and indexed cost of acquisition, in case of
long term capital asset for the purpose of computing the capital gains;
♦ compute capital gains in case of depreciable assets;
♦ compute capital gains in case of market linked debentures and other
specified securities;
♦ compute capital gains in case of slump sale;
♦ compute the exemption available for investment of capital gains/net
consideration on transfer of certain assets;
♦ compute the capital gains chargeable to tax after deducting the
exemptions available in respect of capital gains;
♦ appreciate the concessional tax treatment available for short-term capital
gains and for long term capital gains on transfer of listed equity
shares/units of an equity oriented fund;
♦ compute the tax liability applying the special rates of tax on long-term
capital gains and short-term capital gains and the normal rates of tax.
Proforma for computation of income under the head “Capital Gains”
Particulars Amt Amt
(`) (`)
tessa
latipac
mret-trohS
a
fo
esac
nI
)ACTS(
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a xxx
result of transfer
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in xxx
connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)
(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be
allowed)
Net Sale Consideration xxx
Less: Cost of acquisition (COA) [Refer table at page 3.464] xxx
Cost of improvement (COI) [Refer table at page xxx xxx
3.466]
Short-term capital gain (STCG) xxx
Less: Exemption under sections 54B/54D xxx
Short-term capital gain chargeable to tax xxx
)ACTL(
tessa
latipac
mret-gnoL
a
fo
esac
nI
In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a xxx
result of transfer
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in xxx
connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)
(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)
Net Sale Consideration xxx
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (ICOA) xxx
CII for the year in which the asset is
transferred
Cost of
× CII for the year in which the asset was
acquisition
first held by the assessee or P.Y. 2001-02,
whichever is later
Less: Indexed cost of improvement (ICOI) xxx xxx
CII for the year in which the asset is
Cost of transferred
×
improvement CII for the year in which the
improvement took place
Long-term capital gains (LTCG) xxx
Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xxx
[Refer Table at pages 3.468-3.470]
Long-term capital gains chargeable to tax xxx
In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a xxx
result of transfer
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in xxx
connection with such transfer (for e.g., brokerage on sale)
(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be
allowed)
Net Sale Consideration xxx
Less: Cost of acquisition (COA) [Refer table at page 3.464] xxx
Less: Cost of improvement (COI) [Refer table at page xxx xxx
3.466]
Long-term capital gains (LTCG) xxx
Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xxx
[Refer Table at pages 3.468-3.470]
Long-term capital gains chargeable to tax xxx
Rate of tax on Short-term Capital Gains (STCG)
Section Rate of tax
• STCG arising on transfer of listed equity shares, units of equity-
oriented fund and unit of business trust1 - STT should have been
paid on such sale.
If transfer takes place Rate of tax
Before 23.7.2024 15%
111A
On or after 23.7.2024 20%
• STCG arising from transaction undertaken in foreign currency
on a recognized stock exchange located in an International
Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a
concessional rate of 15% or 20%, as the case may be, even
though STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.
1The provisions relating to business trust would be dealt at Final level.
Note - STCG arising on transfer of other Short-term Capital Assets would be
chargeable at normal rates of tax.
Rates of tax on Long-term Capital Gains (LTCG)
Section Rate of tax
112A • LTCG exceeding ` 1,25,000 would be taxable
- @10%, if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
- @12.5%, if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
on the transfer of following long-term capital assets -
- listed equity shares, if STT has been paid on acquisition and
transfer of such shares
- units of equity-oriented fund and unit of business trust, if STT
has been paid on transfer of such units
• Total exemption in a previous year cannot exceed ` 1.25 lakhs.
• If such transaction is undertaken on a recognized stock
exchange located in an IFSC, LTCG would be taxable at a
concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be, where the
consideration for transfer is received or receivable in foreign
currency, even though STT is not paid in respect of such
transaction.
• Benefit of indexation and currency fluctuation would not be
available.
112 Long-term capital Rate of tax
asset (LTCA)
If transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
Unlisted securities, or Non-corporate non-resident/ foreign
shares of a closely held company - 10% without the benefit of
company indexation and foreign currency fluctuation
Other Assessees – 20% with indexation
benefit
Listed securities (other - 10% without indexation or
than a unit) or a zero- - 20% with indexation benefit
coupon bond
whichever is more beneficial to the assesse
Other Assets (other - 20% with indexation benefit
than taxable u/s 112A)
If transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
Land or building or both Individual or HUF, being a resident –
if acquired before 12.5% without indexation or 20% with
23.7.2024 indexation benefit, whichever is more
beneficial to the assessee
Other Assessees – 12.5% without
indexation
- Land or building or 12.5% without indexation
both if acquired on or [In case of non-residents, LTCG on transfer
after 23.7.2024 of unlisted securities, or shares of a closely
or held company, would be taxable @12.5%
- Other Assets (other without indexation and foreign currency
than taxable u/s 112A) fluctuation]
Notes:
•
In case of a resident individual or a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF), the
LTCG taxable u/s 112 or 112A or STCG taxable u/s 111A shall be reduced by
the unexhausted basic exemption limit and the balance shall be subject to tax.
•
In respect of bonds or debentures (whether listed or unlisted) transferred
before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-
term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed accordingly. If
unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred on or after 23.7.2024, the
resulting capital gains will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the
holding period. Indexation benefit is in any case not available for
bonds/debentures, even if transferred before 23.07.2024.
•
No deduction under Chapter VI-A can be claimed in respect of such LTCG
chargeable to tax u/s 112 or u/s 112A or STCG chargeable to tax u/s 111A.
•
Rebate u/s 87A is not available in respect of tax payable on LTCG u/s 112A.
•
In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime, enhanced surcharge
of 25% would not be levied on dividend income, STCG taxable u/s 111A and
LTCG taxable u/s 112 and u/s 112A.
•
In case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime under section 115BAC, enhanced surcharge of 25% or 37% would not
be levied on dividend income, STCG taxable u/s 111A and LTCG taxable u/s 112
and u/s 112A.
Period of holding [Section 2(42A)]
[In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024]
STCA, if held for • Security (otherthan unit) listed in a recognized stock
≤ 12 months exchange
LTCA, if held for • Unitof equityorientedfund/unitofUTI
> 12 months • Zero Couponbond
STCA, if held for
≤ 24 months •Unlisted shares
LTCA, if held for •Land or building or both
> 24 months
STCA, if held for
≤ 36 months • Unlisted securities other than shares
LTCA, if held for • Other capital assets
> 36 months
[In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024]
STCA, if held for
• Security listedina recognizedstock exchange
≤ 12 months
• Unitof equity orientedfund/UTI
LTCA, if held for
• Zero Couponbond
> 12 months
STCA, if held for
≤ 24 months
•Other capital assets
LTCA, if held for
> 24 months
Note – It is to be noted that as per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer
of the following assets would always be capital gains arising from transfer of short-
term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets:
- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed or
matures on or after 23.7.2024.
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Section 45 provides that any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital
asset effected in the previous year will be chargeable to income-tax under the
head ‘Capital Gains’. Such capital gains will be deemed to be the income of the
previous year in which the transfer took place. In this charging section, two terms
are important. One is “capital asset” and the other is “transfer”.
Hence, in this unit on capital gains, we begin our discussion with the definition of
“capital asset” and “transfer”. Thereafter, we will proceed to discuss the various
circumstances under which capital gains tax is levied. There are certain
transactions which are not to be regarded as transfer for the purposes of capital
gains. These transactions have also been discussed in this chapter. There is a
separate method of computation of capital gains in respect of depreciable assets.
Also, there are exemptions in cases where capital gains are invested in specified
assets. All these aspects are being discussed in this unit.
4.2 CAPITAL ASSET
Definition: According to section 2(14), a capital asset means –
(a) property of any kind held by an assessee, whether or not connected with his
business or profession.
(b) any securities held by a Foreign Institutional Investor which has invested in
such securities in accordance with the SEBI regulations.
(c) any unit linked insurance policy (ULIP) issued on or after 1.2.2021, to which
exemption under section 10(10D) does not apply on account of premium
payable exceeding ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term
of such policy.
In a case where premium is payable by a person for more than one ULIP
issued on or after 1.2.2021 and the aggregate of premium payable on such
ULIPs exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any
such ULIP(s), the exemption under section 10(10D) would be available in
respect of any of those ULIPs (at the option of the assessee) whose
aggregate premium payable does not exceed ` 2,50,000 for any of the
previous years during their term. All other ULIPs would be capital assets.
Note – Provisions relating to taxability or otherwise of ULIPs issued on or
after 1.2.2021 are not being made applicable at Intermediate level.
Accordingly, section 45(1B) has been excluded by way of Study Guidelines.
Consequently, reference to such ULIPs has not been made in the discussion of
section 10(10D) and in the definition of equity oriented fund for the purpose
of section 111A and 112A in the Study Material.
However, it does not include—
(i) Stock-in trade: Any stock-in-trade [other than securities referred to in (b)
above], consumable stores or raw materials held for the purpose of the
business or profession of the assessee;
Whether a particular asset is stock-in-trade or capital asset does not depend
upon the nature of the item, but the manner in which the same is held. The
item would be stock-in-trade in the hands of the assessee who deals or
trades in that item; however, the same item would be capital asset for the
assessee who holds it as an investment.
Example: A dealer in real estate holds a piece of land as stock-in-trade. But
the same will be capital asset for an assessee who holds it as an investment.
The exclusion of stock-in-trade from the definition of capital asset is only in
respect of sub-clause (a) above and not sub-clause (b). This implies that even
if the nature of such security in the hands of the Foreign Portfolio Investor is
stock in trade, the same would be treated as a capital asset and the profit on
transfer would be taxable as capital gains.
Further, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Finance (No.2) Bill, 2014
clarifies that the income arising from transfer of such security by a Foreign
Portfolio Investor (FPI) would be in the nature of capital gain, irrespective of
the presence or otherwise in India, of the Fund manager managing the
investments of the assessee.
(ii) Personal effects: Personal effects, that is to say, movable property
(including wearing apparel and furniture) held for personal use by the
assessee or any member of his family dependent on him.
EXCLUSIONS:
(a) jewellery;
(b) archaeological collections;
(c) drawings;
(d) paintings;
(e) sculptures; or
(f) any work of art.
Definition of Jewellery- Jewellery is a capital asset and the profits or gains
arising from the transfer of jewellery held for personal use are chargeable to
tax under the head “capital gains”. For this purpose, the expression
‘jewellery’ includes the following:
(i) Ornaments made of gold, silver, platinum or any other precious metal
or any alloy containing one or more of such precious metals, whether
or not containing any precious or semi-precious stones and whether
or not worked or sewn into any wearing apparel;
(ii) Precious or semi-precious stones, whether or not set in any furniture,
utensil or other article or worked or sewn into any wearing apparel.
(iii) Rural agricultural land in India i.e., agricultural land in India which is not
situated in any specified area.
As per the definition, only rural agricultural lands in India are excluded from
the purview of the term ‘capital asset’. Hence urban agricultural lands
constitute capital assets. Accordingly, the agricultural land described in (a)
and (b) below, being land situated within the specified urban limits, would
fall within the definition of “capital asset”, and transfer of such land would
attract capital gains tax -
(a) agricultural land situated in any area within the jurisdiction of a
municipality or cantonment board having population of not less than
ten thousand, or
(b) agricultural land situated in any area within such distance, measured
aerially, in relation to the range of population as shown hereunder -
Shortest aerial distance Population according to the last
from the local limits of a preceding census of which the
municipality or relevant figures have been
cantonment board published before the first day of the
referred to in item (a) previous year.
(i) ≤ 2 kms > 10,000
(ii) > 2 kms but ≤ 6 kms > 1,00,000
(iii) > 6 kms but ≤ 8 kms > 10,00,000
Example
Area Shortest aerial Population according to Is the land
distance from the last preceding situated in
the local limits census of which the this area a
of a municipality relevant figures have capital
or cantonment been published before asset?
board referred the first day of the
to in item (a) previous year.
(i) A 1 km 9,000 No
(ii) B 1.5 kms 12,000 Yes
(iii) C 2 kms 11,00,000 Yes
(iv) D 3 kms 80,000 No
(v) E 4 kms 3,00,000 Yes
(v) F 5 kms 12,00,000 Yes
(vi) G 6 kms 8,000 No
(vii) H 7 kms 4,00,000 No
(viii) I 8 kms 10,50,000 Yes
(ix) J 9 kms 15,00,000 No
Explanation regarding gains arising on the transfer of urban
agricultural land – Explanation 1 to section 2(1A) clarifies that capital gains
arising from transfer of any agricultural land situated in any non-rural area
(as explained above) will not constitute agricultural revenue within the
meaning of section 2(1A).
In other words, the capital gains arising from the transfer of such urban
agricultural land would not be treated as agricultural income for the purpose
of exemption u/s 10(1). Hence, such gains would be subject to u/s 45.
(iv) Specified Gold Bonds: 6½% Gold Bonds, 1977, or 7% Gold Bonds, 1980, or
National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, issued by the Central Government;
(v) Special Bearer Bonds, 1991 issued by the Central Government;
(vi) Gold Deposit Bonds issued under the Gold Deposit Scheme, 1999 or
deposit certificates issued under the Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2015 and
Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2019 notified by the Central Government.
Note – ‘Property’ includes and shall be deemed to have always included any
rights in or in relation to an Indian company, including rights of management or
control or any other rights whatsoever.
LATIPAC
863.4
])41(2
noitceS[
sah
hcihw
IIF
a
yb
dleh
seitiruces
ynA
na
yb
dleh
dnik
yna
fo
ytreporP
IBES
rep
sa
seitiruces
hcus
ni
detsevni
detcennoc
ton
ro
rehtehw
,eessessa
snoitalugeR
noisseforp
ro
ssenisub
sih
htiw
SNOISULCXE
sdnoB
tisopeD
dloG
,sdnoB
dloG
½6
laruR
stceffE
lanosreP
,edart-ni-kcotS
dloG
rednu
deussi
dloG
%7
,7791
larutlucirgA
elbavom
,.e.i[
elbamusnoc
/9991
,emehcS
tisopeD
,0891
,sdnoB
dnaL
gnidulcni
ytreporp
war
,serots
setacifitreC
tisopeD
ecnefeD
lanoitaN
dna
lerappa
gniraew
dleh
slairetam
dloG
rednu
deussi
,0891
,sdnoB
dloG
rof
dleh
erutinruf
ro
ssenisub
rof
,emehcS
noitasitenoM
reraeB
laicepS
eht
yb
esu
lanosrep
noisseforp
yb
deifiton
8102/
deussi
,sdnoB
sih
ro
eessessa
.tvoG
lartneC
eht
.tvoG
lartneC
eht
yb
]ylimaf
STCEFFE
LANOSREP
MORF
SNOISULCXE
tra
fo
krow
ynA
ro
sgnitniaP
sgniwarD
lacigoloeahcrA
yrelleweJ
serutplucS
snoitcelloc
)4
1(2
s/u
stessa
la
tip
ac
,ec
neh
,era
s
te
ssa
esehT
3.368 INCOME TAX LAW
4.3 SHORT TERM AND LONG TERM CAPITAL
ASSETS
• Definition: As per section 2(42A), short-term capital asset means a capital
asset held by an assessee for not more than 36 months immediately
preceding the date of its transfer.
However, w.e.f. 23.7.2024, a capital asset will be a short-term capital asset if
it is held by an assessee for not more than 24 months immediately preceding
the date of its transfer.
As per section 2(29A), long-term capital asset means a capital asset which is
not a short-term capital asset.
Accordingly, based on the period of holding capital assets would be classified
as short-term or long-term capital asset as follows:
Capital Asset STCG, if held for LTCG, if held for
In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
• Security (other than unit)
listed in a recognized stock ≤ 12 months > 12 months
exchange immediately immediately
• Unit of equity oriented preceding the date preceding the date
fund/unit of UTI of its transfer of its transfer
• Zero Coupon bond
• Unlisted shares ≤ 24 months > 24 months
• Land or building or both immediately immediately
preceding the date preceding the date
of its transfer of its transfer
• Unlisted securities other ≤ 36 months > 36 months
than shares immediately immediately
• Other capital assets preceding the date preceding the date
of its transfer of its transfer
In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
• Security listed in a ≤ 12 months > 12 months
recognized stock exchange immediately immediately
• Unit of equity-oriented preceding the date preceding the date
fund/unit of UTI of its transfer of its transfer
• Zero Coupon bond
• Other capital assets ≤ 24 months > 24 months
immediately immediately
preceding the date preceding the date
of its transfer of its transfer
Note – As per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer of the
following assets would always be capital gains arising from transfer of short-
term capital assets irrespective of the period of holding of such assets -
- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or redeemed
or matures on or after 23.7.2024.
• Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
Equity oriented A fund set up under a scheme of a mutual fund2
fund and
(i) in a case where the fund invested in the units of
another fund which is traded on a recognised
stock exchange –
I. a minimum of 90% of the total proceeds of
such fund is invested in the units of such
other fund; and
II. such other fund also invests a minimum of
90% of its total proceeds in the equity shares
of domestic companies listed on a
recognised stock exchange; and
(ii) in any other case, a minimum of 65% of the total
proceeds of such fund is invested in the equity
shares of domestic companies listed on a
recognised stock exchange.
However, the percentage of equity shareholding or unit
held in respect of the fund, as the case may be, shall be
computed with reference to the annual average of the
monthly averages of the opening and closing figures.
2Specified under section 10(23D)
Zero Coupon A bond
Bond [Section - issued by any infrastructure capital company or
2(48)] infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt
fund3 or a public sector company or a scheduled
bank on or after 1st June, 2005,
- in respect of which no payment and benefit is
received or receivable before maturity or
redemption from such issuing entity and
- which the Central Government may notify in this
behalf.
Note: The income from transfer of a zero-coupon bond (not being held as
stock-in-trade) is to be treated as capital gains. Section 2(47)(iva) provides that
maturity or redemption of a zero coupon bond shall be treated as a transfer for
the purposes of capital gains tax.
• Determination of period of holding [Clause (i) of Explanation 1 to
section 2(42A)]: In determining period of holding of any capital asset by the
assessee in the circumstances stated in column (1), the period shall be
determined by considering the period specified in Column (2).
Determination of period of holding
S. Circumstances Period of holding
No. (Column 1) (Column 2)
1 Where shares held in a The period subsequent to the date of
company in liquidation liquidation of company shall be excluded.
2 Where asset becomes the The period for which the capital asset
property of an assessee by was held by the previous owner shall be
virtue of section 49(1) included.
3 Where inventory of business is Period from the date of conversion or
converted into or treated as a treatment as a capital asset shall be
capital asset by the assesse considered.
4 Where share/s in the Indian The period for which the share(s) was
company (amalgamated held by the assessee in the
company), becomes the amalgamating company shall be
property of an assessee in lieu of included.
3 Infrastructure debt fund notified by Central Government under section 10(47)
share/s held by him in the
amalgamating company at the
time of transfer referred under
section 47(vii).
5 Where the share or any other Period from the date of allotment of
security is subscribed by the such share or security shall be
assessee on the basis of right to reckoned.
subscribe to any share or security
or by the person in whose favour
such right is renounced by the
assessee
6 Where the right to subscribe to Period from the date of offer of such
any share or security is right by the company or institution shall
renounced in favour of any other be reckoned
person
7 Where any financial asset is Period from the date of allotment of
allotted without any payment such financial asset shall be reckoned
and on the basis of holding of
any other financial asset
8 Where share/s in the Indian The period for which the share/s were
company being a resulting held by the assessee in demerged
company becomes the property company shall be included
of an assessee in consideration
of demerger
9 Where equity share in a The period for which the preference
company becomes the property shares were held by the assesse shall be
of the assessee by way of included
conversion of preference
shares into equity shares
referred under section 47(xb)
10 (i) Where Electronic Gold The period for which such gold was
Receipt is issued by a Vault held by the assessee prior to conversion
Manager in respect of gold into the Electronic Gold Receipt
deposited [Conversion of
gold into Electronic Gold
Receipt as referred to in
section 47(viid)]
(ii) Where gold is released in The period for which such Electronic
respect of an Electronic Gold Gold Receipt was held by the assessee
Receipt [Conversion of prior to its conversion into gold
Electronic Gold Receipt into
gold as referred to in section
47(viid)]
11 Where any specified security or Period from the date of allotment or
sweat equity shares is allotted transfer of such specified security or
or transferred, directly or sweat equity shares shall be reckoned
indirectly, by the employer free
of cost or at concessional rate to
his employees (including former
employees)
“Sweat equity shares” means equity shares issued by a company to its
employees or directors at a discount or for consideration other than
cash for providing know-how or making available rights in the nature
of intellectual property rights or value additions, by whatever name
called.
• Period of holding in respect of other capital assets - The period for
which any capital asset is held by the assessee shall be determined in
accordance with any rules made by the CBDT in this behalf. Accordingly, the
CBDT has inserted Rule 8AA in the Income-tax Rules, 1962 to provide for
method of determination of period of holding of capital assets, other than the
capital assets mentioned in clause (i) of Explanation 1 to section 2(42A).
Specifically, in the case of a capital asset, being a share or debenture of a
company, which becomes the property of the assessee in the circumstances
mentioned in section 47(x), there shall be included the period for which the
bond, debenture, debenture-stock or deposit certificate, as the case may be,
was held by the assessee prior to the conversion.
Note: Section 47(x) provides that any transfer by way of conversion of bonds
or debentures, debenture-stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a
company into shares or debentures of that company shall not be regarded as
transfer for the purposes of levy of capital gains tax.
4.4 TRANSFER: WHAT IT MEANS? [SECTION
2(47)]
Section 2(47) contains an inclusive definition of the term ‘transfer’. Accordingly,
transfer in relation to a capital asset includes the following types of transactions—
(i) the sale, exchange or relinquishment of the asset; or
(ii) the extinguishment of any rights therein; or
(iii) the compulsory acquisition thereof under any law; or
Example: Acquisition of industrial undertaking under the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.
(iv) the owner of a capital asset may convert the same into the stock-in-trade of
a business carried on by him. Such conversion is treated as transfer; or
Example: Where an investor in shares starts a business of dealing in shares
and treats existing investments as stock-in-trade of the newly set up business,
such conversion shall be regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains.
(v) the maturity or redemption of a zero-coupon bond; or
(vi) Part-performance of the contract: Sometimes, possession of an immovable
property is given in consideration of part-performance of a contract.
Example:
A enters into an agreement for the sale of his house. The purchaser gives the
entire sale consideration to A. A hands over complete rights of possession to
the purchaser since he has received the entire sale consideration. Under the
Income-tax Act, the above transaction is considered as transfer.
(vii) Lastly, there are certain types of transactions which have the effect of
transferring or enabling the enjoyment of an immovable property.
Example:
A person may become a member of a co-operative society, company or other
association of persons which may be building houses/flats. When he pays an
agreed amount, the society etc. hands over possession of the house to the
person concerned. No conveyance is registered. For the purpose of income-
tax, the above transaction is a transfer.
ILLUSTRATION 1
How will you calculate the period of holding in case of the following assets?
(1) Shares held in a company in liquidation
(2) Bonus shares
(3) Flat in a co-operative society
SOLUTION
(1) Shares held in a company in liquidation - The period after the date on
which the company goes into liquidation shall be excluded while calculating
the period of holding. Therefore, the period of holding shall commence
from the date of acquisition and end with the date on which the company
goes into liquidation.
(2) Bonus shares - The period of holding shall be reckoned from the date of
allotment of bonus shares and will end with the date of transfer.
(3) Flat in a co-operative society - The period of holding shall be reckoned
from the date of allotment of shares in the society and will end with the
date of transfer.
Note – Any transaction whether by way of becoming a member of, or
acquiring shares in, a co-operative society or by way of any agreement or
any arrangement or in any other manner whatsoever which has the effect of
transferring, or enabling enjoyment of, any immovable property is a transfer
as per section 2(47)(vi).
Hence, it is possible to take a view that any date from which such right is
obtained may be taken as the date of acquisition.
4.5 SCOPE AND YEAR OF CHARGEABILITY
[SECTION 45]
(i) General Provision [Section 45(1)]
Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the
previous year (other than exemptions covered under this chapter) shall be
chargeable to income-tax under this head in the previous year in which the
transfer took place.
Year of chargeability - Capital gains are chargeable as the income of the
previous year in which the sale or transfer takes place. In other words, for
determining the year of chargeability, the relevant date of transfer is not the date
of the agreement to sell, but the actual date of sale i.e., the date on which the
effect of transfer of title to the property as contemplated by the parties has taken
place4.
However, as already noted, Income-tax Act has recognised certain transactions as
transfer in spite of the fact that conveyance deed might not have been executed
and registered. Power of Attorney sales as explained above or co-operative
society transactions for acquisition of house are examples in this regard.
(ii) Insurance Receipts [Section 45(1A)]
Where any person receives any money or other assets under any insurance from an
insurer on account of damage to or destruction of any capital asset, as a result of
- flood, typhoon, hurricane, cyclone, earthquake or other convulsion of
nature,
- riot or civil disturbance,
- accidental fire or explosion or
- of action by an enemy or action taken in combating an enemy (whether
with or without declaration of war),
then, any profits or gains arising from receipt of such money or other assets shall
be chargeable to income-tax under the head “Capital gains” and shall be deemed
to be the income of such person for the previous year in which such money or
other asset was received.
Full value of consideration: In order to compute capital gains, the value of any
money or the fair market value of other assets on the date of such receipt shall be
deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result
of the transfer of such capital assets.
(iii) Conversion or treatment of a capital asset as stock-in-trade [Section 45(2)]
A person who is the owner of a capital asset may convert the same or treat it as
stock-in-trade of the business carried on by him. As noted above, the above
transaction is a transfer.
4Alapati Venkatramiah v. CIT [1965] 57 ITR 185 (SC)
As per section 45(2), notwithstanding anything contained in section 45(1), being
the charging section, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion or
treatment will be chargeable to income-tax as his income of the previous year
in which such stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred by him.
Full value of consideration: In order to compute the capital gains, the fair
market value of the asset on the date of such conversion or treatment shall be
deemed to be the full value of the consideration received as a result of the
transfer of the capital asset.
Components of
income arising Manner of Computation of capital
on sale of gains and business income
stock-in-trade
FMV on the date of conversion (-)
Cost/Indexed Cost of acquisition/
improvement
Capital Gains
Conversion
Indexation benefit would be considered
of capital
in relation to the year of conversion of
asset into
capital asset into stock-in-trade
stock-in-
trade
Business Sale price of stock-in-trade (-) FMV on
Income the date of conversion
Note – Both Capital Gains and Business income are chargeable to tax in the
year in which stock-in-trade is sold or otherwise transferred.
ILLUSTRATION 2
A is the owner of a car. On 1-4-2024, he starts a business of purchase and sale of
motor cars. He treats the above car as part of the stock-in-trade of his new
business. He sells the same on 31-3-2025 and gets a profit of ` 1 lakh. Discuss the
tax implication in his hands under the head “Capital gains”.
SOLUTION
Since car is a personal asset, conversion or treatment of the same as the stock-in-
trade of his business will not be trapped by the provisions of section 45(2). Hence,
A is not liable to capital gains tax.
ILLUSTRATION 3
X converts his capital asset (acquired on June 10, 2006 for ` 60,000) into stock-in-trade
on March 10, 2024. The fair market value on the date of the above conversion was
` 5,50,000. He subsequently sells the stock-in-trade so converted for ` 6,00,000 on June
10, 2024. Discuss the year of chargeability of capital gain and business income.
SOLUTION
Since the capital asset is converted into stock-in-trade during the previous year
2023-24 relevant to the A.Y. 2024-25, it will be a transfer u/s 2(47) during the
P.Y. 2023-24. However, the profits or gains arising from the above conversion will
be chargeable to tax during the A.Y. 2025-26, since the stock-in-trade has been
sold only on June 10, 2024. For this purpose, the fair market value on the date of
such conversion (i.e. 10th March, 2024) will be the full value of consideration for
computation of capital gains. The capital gains would be computed by reducing
the indexed cost of acquisition therefrom, since the transfer (i.e., conversion of
capital asset into stock in trade) took place during the P.Y. 2023-24. The business
income of ` 50,000 (i.e., ` 6,00,000 (-) ` 5,50,000, being the fair market value on
the date of conversion) would also be taxable in the A.Y.2025-26. Thus, both
capital gains and business income would be chargeable to tax in the A.Y.2025-26.
(iv) Compensation on compulsory acquisition [Section 45(5)]
Sometimes, a building or some other capital asset belonging to a person is taken
over by the Central Government by way of compulsory acquisition. In that case,
the consideration for the transfer is determined by the Central Government of
RBI. When the Central Government pays the above compensation, capital gains
may arise. Such capital gains are chargeable as income of the previous year in
which such compensation is received.
Enhanced Compensation - Many times, persons whose capital assets have been
taken over by the Central Government and who get compensation from the
Government go to the Court of law for enhancement of compensation. If the
court awards a compensation which is higher than the original compensation, the
difference thereof will be chargeable to capital gains in the year in which the
same is received from the government.
Cost of acquisition in case of enhanced compensation - For this purpose, the
cost of acquisition and cost of improvement shall be taken to be nil.
Compensation received in pursuance of an interim order deemed as income
chargeable to tax in the year of final order - In order to remove the uncertainty
regarding the year in which the amount of compensation received in pursuance of
an interim order of the Court, Tribunal or other authority is to be charged to tax,
it is provided that such compensation shall be deemed to be income chargeable
under the head ‘Capital gains’ in the previous year in which the final order of such
Court, Tribunal or other authority is made.
Reduction of enhanced compensation - Where capital gain has been charged
on the compensation received by the assessee for the compulsory acquisition of
any capital asset or enhanced compensation received by the assessee and
subsequently such compensation is reduced by any Court, Tribunal or any
authority, the assessed capital gain of that year shall be recomputed by taking
into consideration the reduced amount. This re-computation shall be done by
way of rectification5.
Death of the transferor - It is possible that the transferor may die before he
receives the enhanced compensation. In that case, the enhanced compensation
will be chargeable to tax in the hands of the person who receives the same.
4.6 CAPITAL GAINS ON DISTRIBUTION OF
ASSETS BY COMPANIES IN LIQUIDATION
[SECTION 46]
(1) In the hands of liquidated company: Where the assets of a company are
distributed to its shareholders on its liquidation, such distribution shall not
be regarded as a transfer by the company for the purposes of section 45
[Section 46(1)].
The above section is restricted in its application to the circumstances
mentioned therein i.e., the assets of the company must be distributed in
specie to shareholders on the liquidation of the company. If, however, the
liquidator sells the assets of the company resulting in a capital gain and
distributes the funds so collected, the company will be liable to pay tax on
such gains.
5under section 155
(2) In the hands of shareholders: Shareholders receive money or other assets
from the company on its liquidation. They will be chargeable to income-tax
under the head ‘capital gains’ in respect of the market value of the assets
received on the date of distribution, or the moneys so received by them.
The portion of the distribution which is attributable to the accumulated
profits of the company is to be treated as dividend income under section
2(22)(c), which would be taxable in the hands of shareholders. The same will
be deducted from the amount received/fair market value for the purpose of
determining the consideration for computation of capital gains.
Capital Gains on distribution
of assets by companies in
liquidation [Section 46]
In the hands of In the hands of
the company shareholders
[Section 46(1)] [Section 46(2)]
Distribution is
not a transfer
Distribution attributable to Money received (+)
accumulated profits of the FMV of assets
company distributed (-) deemed
dividend u/s 2(22)(c)
No capital gains
tax liability
Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(c) Full value of
consideration for the
purpose of section 48
Taxable in the hands of To be considered for
shareholders as “Income computing Capital
from Other Sources” Gains in the hands
of shareholders
4.7 CAPITAL GAINS ON BUYBACK OF SHARES
OR SPECIFIED SECURITIES [SECTION 46A]
(1) In case of shares of a company other than a domestic company and
specified securities: Any consideration received by a holder of specified
securities (other than shares of a domestic company) from any company
on purchase of its specified securities is chargeable to tax in the hands of
the holder of specified securities. The difference between the cost of
acquisition and the value of consideration received by the holder of
securities is chargeable to tax as capital gains in his hands. The
computation of capital gains shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of section 48.
Such capital gains shall be chargeable in the year in which such securities
were purchased by the company. For this purpose, “specified securities”
shall have the same meaning as given in Explanation to section 77A of the
Companies Act, 19566.
As far as shares are concerned, this provision would be attracted in the
hands of the shareholder only if the shares are bought back by a company,
other than a domestic company.
(2) In case of buy back of shares effected before 1.10.2024 by domestic
companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) before
1.10.2024 by a domestic company, additional income-tax@20% (plus
surcharge @12% and cess@4%) is leviable in the hands of the
company7.Consequently, the income arising to the shareholders in respect of
such buyback of shares by the domestic company is exempt under section
10(34A), since the domestic company is liable to pay additional income-tax
on the buyback of shares.
(3) In case of buy back of shares effected on or after 1.10.2024 by domestic
companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) on or
after 1.10.2024 by a domestic company, the sum paid by a domestic company
for purchase of its own shares would be treated as dividend and taxable under
6 Now section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013
7Under section 115QA
the head “Income from Other Sources” in the hands of shareholders. No
deduction for expenses would be available against such dividend income.
Consequently, as per section 46A, value of consideration received by a
shareholder on buy back of shares by a domestic company would be Nil and
the difference between the cost of acquisition and the value of consideration
received by the shareholder will result into capital loss. The same can be set
off and carried forward as per the applicable set-off & carry forward
provisions of the Act. If it is long-term capital loss, it can be set-off only
against long-term capital gains. If it is a short-term capital loss, it can set-off
against both long term capital gains and short term capital gains. For details,
refer Chapter: 5: Aggregation of income, Set-off and Carry Forward of Losses.
4.8 TRANSACTIONS NOT REGARDED AS
TRANSFER [SECTION 47]
Section 47 specifies certain transactions which will not be regarded as transfer for
the purpose of capital gains tax:
(1) Total or partial partition of a HUF: Any distribution of capital assets on
the total or partial partition of a HUF [Section 47(i)].
(2) A gift or will or an irrevocable trust by individual or HUF: Any transfer of
a capital asset by an individual or HUF under a gift or will or an irrevocable
trust [Section 47(iii)].
Note – Upto A.Y. 2024-25, transfer of a capital asset (other than shares,
debentures or warrants allotted by a company under any ESOP) under a gift
or will or irrevocable trust by any person was not considered as a transfer.
(3) Transfer of capital asset by holding company to its wholly owned
Indian subsidiary company: Any transfer of capital asset by a company to
its subsidiary company [Section 47(iv)].
Conditions:
(i) The parent company or its nominee must hold the whole of the shares
of the subsidiary company; and
(ii) The subsidiary company must be an Indian company.
(4) Transfer of capital asset by a subsidiary company to its 100% holding
company, being an Indian company: Any transfer of capital asset by a
subsidiary company to the holding company [Section 47(v)].
Conditions:
(i) The whole of shares of the subsidiary company must be held by the
holding company; and
(ii) The holding company must be an Indian company.
Exception - The exemption mentioned in 3 or 4 above will not apply if a
capital asset is transferred as stock-in-trade.
(5) Transfer of capital asset by amalgamating company to amalgamated
Indian company, in a scheme of amalgamation: Any transfer, in a scheme
of amalgamation, of a capital asset by the amalgamating company to the
amalgamated company if the amalgamated company is an Indian company
[Section 47(vi)].
(6) Transfer of capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting
Indian company, in a scheme of demerger: Any transfer in a demerger, of
a capital asset by the demerged company to the resulting company, if the
resulting company is an Indian company [Section 47(vib)].
(7) Transfer or issue of shares by a resulting company, in a scheme of
demerger: Any transfer or issue of shares by the resulting company, in a
scheme of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged company, if the
transfer is made in consideration of the demerger of the undertaking
[Section 47(vid)].
(8) Transfer of shares by a shareholder in a scheme of amalgamation: Any
transfer by a shareholder, in a scheme of amalgamation, of shares held by
him in the amalgamating company [Section 47(vii)].
Conditions:
(i) The transfer is made in consideration of the allotment to him of any
share/s in the amalgamated company, except where the shareholder
itself is the amalgamated company;
(ii) The amalgamated company is an Indian company.
Example:
Let us take a case where A Ltd., an Indian company, holds 60% of shares in B Ltd.
B Ltd. amalgamates with A Ltd. Since A Ltd. itself is the shareholder of B Ltd., A
Ltd., being the amalgamated company, cannot issue shares to itself. However, A
Ltd. has to issue shares to the other shareholders of B Ltd.
ILLUSTRATION 4
M held 2000 shares in a company ABC Ltd., an Indian company. This
company amalgamated with another Indian company XYZ Ltd. during the
previous year ending 31-3-2025. Under the scheme of amalgamation, M was
allotted 1000 shares in the new company. The market value of shares allotted
is higher by ` 50,000 than the value of holding in ABC Ltd. The Assessing
Officer proposes to treat the transaction as an exchange and to tax ` 50,000
as capital gain. Is he justified?
SOLUTION
In the above example, the transaction is squarely covered by the exemption
explained above and the proposal of the Assessing Officer to treat the
transaction as a transfer is not justified.
(9) Transfer of Government Security outside India by a non-resident to
another non-resident: Any transfer of a capital asset, being a Government
Security carrying a periodic payment of interest, made outside India
through an intermediary dealing in settlement of securities, by a non-
resident to another non-resident [Section 47(viib)]
(10) Redemption of sovereign gold bonds by an Individual: Redemption by
an individual of sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI under the Sovereign
Gold Bond Scheme, 2015 [Section 47(viic)]
(11) Conversion of gold into Electronic Gold Receipt or vice a versa: Any
transfer of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic Gold
Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic Gold Receipt
into gold [Section 47(viid)]
(12) Transfer of specified capital asset to the Government or university etc.:
Any transfer of any of the following capital asset to the Government or to
the University or the National Museum, National Art Gallery, National
Archives or any other public museum or institution notified by the Central
Government to be of national importance or to be of renown throughout
any State
(i) work of art
(ii) archaeological, scientific or art collection
(iii) book
(iv) manuscript
(v) drawing
(vi) painting
(vii) photograph or
(viii) print [Section 47(ix)].
(13) Transfer on conversion of bonds or debentures etc. into shares or
debentures: Any transfer by way of conversion of bonds or debentures,
debenture stock or deposit certificates in any form, of a company into shares
or debentures of that company [Section 47(x)].
(14) Conversion of preference shares into equity shares: Any transfer by way
of conversion of preference shares of a company into equity shares of that
company [Section 47(xb)].
(15) Transfer of capital asset under Reverse Mortgage: Any transfer of a
capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and
notified by the Central Government [Section 47(xvi)].
The Reverse Mortgage scheme is for the benefit of senior citizens, who own
a residential house property. In order to supplement their existing income,
they can mortgage their house property with a scheduled bank or housing
finance company, in return for a lump-sum amount or for a regular
monthly/quarterly/annual income. The senior citizens can continue to live in
the house and receive regular income, without the botheration of having to
pay back the loan.
The loan will be given up to, say, 60% of the value of residential house
property mortgaged. Also, the bank/housing finance company would
undertake a revaluation of the property once every 5 years. The borrower
can use the loan amount for renovation and extension of residential
property, family’s medical and emergency expenditure etc., amongst others
However, he cannot use the amount for speculative or trading purposes.
The Reverse Mortgage Scheme, 2008, now includes within its scope,
disbursement of loan by an approved lending institution, in part or in full, to
the annuity sourcing institution, for the purposes of periodic payments by
way of annuity to the reverse mortgagor. This would be an additional mode
of disbursement i.e., in addition to direct disbursements by the approved
lending institution to the Reverse Mortgagor by way of periodic payments
or lump sum payment in one or more tranches.
An annuity sourcing institution has been defined to mean Life Insurance
Corporation of India or any other insurer registered with the Insurance
Regulatory and Development Authority.
Maximum Period of Reverse Mortgage Loan:
Mode of disbursement Maximum period of loan
(a) Where the loan is disbursed 20 years from the date of signing the
directly to the Reverse agreement by the reverse mortgagor
Mortgagor and the approved lending institution.
(b) Where the loan is disbursed, The residual life time of the borrower.
in part or in full, to the
annuity sourcing institution
for the purposes of periodic
payments by way of annuity
to the Reverse mortgagor
The bank will recover the loan along with the accumulated interest by
selling the house after the death of the borrower. The excess amount will be
given to the legal heirs. However, before resorting to sale of the house,
preference will be given to the legal heirs to repay the loan and interest and
get the mortgaged property released.
Therefore, section 47(xvi) clarifies that any transfer of a capital asset in a
transaction of reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the
Central Government would not amount to transfer for the purpose of capital
gains.
Exemption of income received in a transaction of reverse mortgage
[Section 10(43)]: Section 10(43), further, provides that the amount received
by the senior citizen as a loan, either in lump sum or in installments, in a
transaction of reverse mortgage would be exempt from income-tax.
ILLUSTRATION 5
In which of the following situations capital gains tax liability does not arise?
(i) Mr. A purchased gold in 1970 for ` 25,000. In the P.Y. 2024-25, he gifted it to
his son at the time of marriage. Fair market value (FMV) of the gold on the
day the gift was made was ` 1,00,000.
(ii) A house property is purchased by a Hindu undivided family in 1945 for
` 20,000. It is given to one of the family members in the P.Y. 2024-25 at the
time of partition of the family. FMV on the date of partition was ` 12,00,000.
(iii) Mr. B purchased 50 convertible debentures for ` 40,000 in 1995 which are
converted into 500 shares worth ` 85,000 in November 2024 by the company.
SOLUTION
We know that capital gains arises only when we transfer a capital asset. The
liability of capital gains tax in the situations given above is discussed as follows:
(i) As per the provisions of section 47(iii), gift of a capital asset by an individual
is not regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore,
capital gains tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
(ii) As per the provisions of section 47(i), distribution of a capital asset (being in
kind) on the total or partial partition of Hindu undivided family is not
regarded as transfer for the purpose of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains
tax liability does not arise in the given situation.
(iii) As per the provisions of section 47(x), conversion of bonds or debentures,
debenture stock or deposit certificates in any form of a company into shares
or debentures of that company is not regarded as transfer for the purpose
of capital gains. Therefore, capital gains tax liability does not arise in the
given situation.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Mr. Abhishek a senior citizen, mortgaged his residential house with a bank, under a
notified reverse mortgage scheme. He was getting loan from bank in monthly
installments. Mr. Abhishek did not repay the loan on maturity and hence gave
possession of the house to the bank, to discharge his loan. How will the treatment
of long-term capital gain be on such reverse mortgage transaction?
SOLUTION
Section 47(xvi) provides that any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of
reverse mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government
shall not be considered as a transfer for the purpose of capital gain.
Accordingly, the mortgaging of residential house with bank by Mr. Abhishek will not be
regarded as a transfer. Therefore, no capital gain will be charged on such transaction.
Further, section 10(43) provides that the amount received by the senior citizen as
a loan, either in lump sum or in installment, in a transaction of reverse mortgage
would be exempt from income-tax. Therefore, the monthly installment amounts
received by Mr. Abhishek would not be taxable.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Examine, with reasons, whether the following statements are True or False.
(i) Alienation of a residential house in a transaction of reverse mortgage under a
scheme made and notified by the Central Government is treated as "transfer"
for the purpose of capital gains.
(ii) Zero coupon bonds of eligible corporation, held for 14 months, will be long-
term capital assets.
(iii) Zero Coupon Bond means a bond on which no payment and benefits are
received or receivable before maturity or redemption.
SOLUTION
(i) False: As per section 47(xvi), such alienation in a transaction of reverse
mortgage under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government is
not regarded as "transfer" for the purpose of capital gains.
(ii) True: Section 2(42A) defines the term 'short-term capital asset'. Under the
proviso to section 2(42A), zero coupon bond held for not more than 12
months will be treated as a short-term capital asset. Consequently, such
bonds held for more than 12 months will be a long-term capital asset.
(iii) True: As per section 2(48), ‘Zero Coupon Bond’ means a bond issued by any
infrastructure capital company or infrastructure capital fund or
infrastructure debt fund or a public sector company, or Scheduled Bank on
or after 1st June 2005, in respect of which no payment and benefit is
received or receivable before maturity or redemption from such issuing
entity and which the Central Government may notify in this behalf.
4.9 IMPORTANT DEFINITIONS
(a) Amalgamation [Section 2(1B)] - “Amalgamation”, in relation to
companies, means -
- the merger of one or more companies with another company or
- the merger of two or more companies to form one company
(the company or companies which so merge being referred to as the
amalgamating company or companies and the company with which they
merge or which is formed as a result of the merger, as the amalgamated
company) in such a manner that -
(i) all the property of the amalgamating company or companies
immediately before the amalgamation becomes the property of the
amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
(ii) all the liabilities of the amalgamating company or companies
immediately before the amalgamation become the liabilities of the
amalgamated company by virtue of the amalgamation;
(iii) shareholders holding not less than three-fourth in value of the shares
in the amalgamating company or companies (other than shares
already held therein immediately before the amalgamation by, or by a
nominee for, the amalgamated company or its subsidiary) become
shareholders of the amalgamated company by virtue of the
amalgamation,
otherwise than as a result of the acquisition of the property of one company
by another company pursuant to the purchase of such property by the other
company or as a result of the distribution of such property to the other
company after the winding up of the first mentioned company.
(b) Demerger [Section 2(19AA)] - “Demerger”, in relation to companies,
means the transfer, pursuant to a scheme of arrangement under sections
230 to 232 of the Companies Act, 2013, by a demerged company of its one
or more undertaking to any resulting company in such a manner that -
(i) all the property of the undertaking, being transferred by the
demerged company, immediately before the demerger, becomes the
property of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;
(ii) all the liabilities relatable to the undertaking, being transferred by the
demerged company, immediately before the demerger, become the
liabilities of the resulting company by virtue of the demerger;
(iii) the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or undertakings
being transferred by the demerged company are transferred at values
appearing in its books of account immediately before the demerger;
However, this provision does not apply where, in compliance to the
Indian Accounting Standards specified in Annexure to the Companies
(Indian Accounting Standards) Rules, 2015, the resulting company
records the value of the property and the liabilities of the undertaking or
undertakings at a value different from the value appearing in the books
of account of the demerged company, immediately before the demerger.
For the purpose of determining the value of the property, any change
in the value of assets consequent to their revaluation shall be ignored.
(iv) the resulting company issues, in consideration of the demerger, its
shares to the shareholders of the demerged company on a
proportionate basis;
Note - If the resulting company is a shareholder of the demerged
company, it cannot issue shares to itself. However, the resulting
company has to issue shares to the other shareholders of the
demerged company.
(v) the shareholders holding not less than three-fourths in value of the
shares in the demerged company (other than shares already held
therein immediately before the demerger, or by a nominee for, the
resulting company or, its subsidiary) become shareholders of the
resulting company or companies by virtue of the demerger, otherwise
than as a result of the acquisition of the property or assets of the
demerged company or any undertaking thereof by the resulting
company;
(vi) the transfer of the undertaking is on a going concern basis;
(vii) the demerger is in accordance with the conditions, if any, notified8 by
the Central Government in this behalf.
Reconstruction or splitting up of a public sector company into separate
companies shall be deemed to be a demerger, if such reconstruction or
splitting up has been made to transfer any asset of the demerged company
to the resulting company and the resulting company –
(a) is a public sector company on the appointed day indicated in such
scheme as may be approved by the Central Government or any other
body authorized under the Companies Act, 1956 or any other law for
the time being in force governing such public sector companies; and
(b) fulfils such other conditions as may be notified by the Central
Government [Explanation 6].
(c) Demerged Company - Demerged company means the company whose
undertaking is transferred, pursuant to a demerger, to a resulting company.
(d) Resulting Company - Resulting company means one or more companies
(including a wholly owned subsidiary thereof) to which the undertaking of
the demerged company is transferred in a demerger and, the resulting
company in consideration of such transfer of undertaking, issues shares to
the shareholders of the demerged company and includes any authority or
body or local authority or public sector company or a company established,
constituted or formed as a result of demerger.
4.10 MODE OF COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL
GAINS [SECTION 48]
(i) Computation of capital gains: The income chargeable under the head
‘Capital gains’ shall be computed by deducting the following items from the
full value of the consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer
of the capital asset:
(1) Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with such
transfer like brokerage, stamp duty, registration fee, legal expenses
etc.
8under sub-section (5) of section 72A
(2) The cost of acquisition and cost of any improvement thereto.
However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of improvement
thereto would not include the deductions claimed on interest u/s 24(b) or
under the provisions of Chapter VI-A.
Interest on loan taken for acquisition, construction, repairs, reconstruction
of house property is allowable as deduction under section 24(b). Sections
80EE and 80EEA in Chapter VI-A provide for deduction of interest payable
on loan taken for acquisition of house property, subject to fulfillment of
certain conditions.
The interest allowed as deduction under section 24(b) while computing
income from house property and interest allowed as deduction under
section 80EE or 80EEA of Chapter VI-A would not be included in the cost of
acquisition or cost of improvement while computing capital gains on
transfer of house property.
(ii) No deduction in respect of STT: No deduction shall, however, be allowed
in computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in
respect of any amount paid on account of securities transaction tax (STT)
under Chapter VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.
(iii) Cost inflation index: Under section 48, for computation of long-term
capital gains arising from the transfer which takes place before
23.7.2024, the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement will be increased
by applying the cost inflation index (CII). Once the cost inflation index is
applied to the cost of acquisition and cost of improvement, it becomes
indexed cost of acquisition and indexed cost of improvement.
“Cost Inflation Index” in relation to a previous year means such index as
may be notified by the Central Government having regard to 75% of
average rise in the Consumer Price Index (Urban) for the immediately
preceding previous year to such previous year.
Indexed cost of acquisition means an amount which bears to the cost of
acquisition, the same proportion as CII for the year in which the asset is
transferred bears to the CII for the first year in which the asset was held by
the assessee or for the year beginning on 1st April, 2001, whichever is later.
Similarly, indexed cost of any improvement means an amount which bears
to the cost of improvement, the same proportion as CII for the year in which
the asset is transferred bears to the CII for the year in which the
improvement to the asset took place.
Below is the summary showing the indexation benefit available to different
types of long-term capital assets which are transferred before 23.7.2024 -
Long-term capital assets which are transferred Indexation
before 23.7.2024 benefit
Bonds or debentures No
Capital indexed bonds issued by the Government Yes
Sovereign Gold Bond issued by the RBI under the Sovereign Yes
Gold Bond Scheme, 2015
Depreciable assets N.A. since it will
Unit of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after be short term
1.4.2023 capital gain
Marked linked debentures
Equity share in a company on which STT is paid both at the No
time of acquisition and transfer
Unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on No
which STT is paid at the time of transfer
Other long-term capital assets Yes
Consequent to the amendment made by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024 in
section 48, no indexation benefit is allowable on long-term capital gains
arising on transfer of any capital assets taking place on or after
23.7.2024.
Computation of tax on LTCG on transfer of land or building or both on
or after 23.7.2024 [Section 112]
A resident individual or HUF, while computing tax on LTCG on transfer of
land or building or both, has the option to take the benefit of indexation
under section 112 in respect of long-term capital gains arising on transfer of
land or building or both which is acquired before 23.7.2024 and transferred
on or after 23.7.2024. Accordingly, LTCG on transfer of such land or building
or both are subject to lower of tax @12.5% (on LTCG computed without
indexation benefit) or @20% (on LTCG computed with indexation benefit).
It may be noted that this benefit to a resident individual or HUF is to be given
only while computing tax on LTCG under section 112 on transfer of land or
building or both and not while computing Income under the head “Capital
Gains” which would form part of gross total income/total income. Thus, for
computing income under the head “Capital Gains” to be included in gross
total income, indexation benefit is not to be given even in case of resident
individual/HUF transferring land or building or both on or after 23.7.2024
which was acquired before 23.7.2024.
The cost inflation indices for the financial years so far have been
notified as under:
Financial Year Cost Inflation Index
2001-02 100
2002-03 105
2003-04 109
2004-05 113
2005-06 117
2006-07 122
2007-08 129
2008-09 137
2009-10 148
2010-11 167
2011-12 184
2012-13 200
2013-14 220
2014-15 240
2015-16 254
2016-17 264
2017-18 272
2018-19 280
2019-20 289
2020-21 301
2021-22 317
2022-23 331
2023-24 348
2024-25 363
(iv) Full value of consideration of shares, debentures or warrants issued
under ESOP in case of transfer under a gift etc. upto A.Y. 2024-25 - In
case where shares, debentures or warrants allotted by a company directly or
indirectly to its employees under the Employees' Stock Option Plan or Scheme
in accordance with the guidelines issued in this behalf by the Central
Government are transferred under a gift or irrecoverable trust upto A.Y. 2024-
25, then the market value on the date of such transfer shall be deemed to be
the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer of
such asset.
(v) Special provision for non-residents – In case of non-residents who invest
foreign exchange to acquire capital assets, capital gains arising from the
transfer of shares or debentures of an Indian company is to be computed in
the following manner:
• The cost of acquisition, the expenditure incurred wholly and
exclusively in connection with the transfer and the full value of the
consideration are to be converted into the same foreign currency with
which such shares were acquired. The conversion has to be done at
the average of Telegraphic Transfer Buying Rate (TTBR) and
Telegraphic Transfer Selling Rate (TTSR) on the respective dates.
• The resulting capital gains shall be reconverted into Indian currency by
applying the TTBR on the date of transfer.
The aforesaid manner of computation of capital gains shall be applied for
every purchase and sale of shares or debentures in an Indian company. This
will provide relief from risk of foreign currency fluctuation to non-residents.
Benefit of indexation will not be available in this case.
On long-term capital gains arising from transfer of unlisted securities or
shares of a company in which public are not substantially interested, non-
residents and foreign companies are subject to tax at a concessional rate of
10% (without indexation benefit or currency conversion) if such transfer takes
place before 23.7.2024 and @12.5% (without indexation benefit or currency
conversion) if such transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024 [Section 112].
Note – The benefit of currency conversion would not be applicable to the long-term
capital gains arising from the transfer of the following assets referred to in section 112A –
(i) equity share in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of
acquisition and transfer
(ii) unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid at
the time of transfer.
4.11 ASCERTAINMENT OF COST IN SPECIFIED
CIRCUMSTANCES [SECTION 49]
A person becomes the owner of a capital asset not only by purchase but also by
several other methods. Section 49 gives guidelines as to how to compute the cost
under different circumstances.
Section Circumstance Cost of acquisition
49(1) Where the capital asset became Cost for which the previous
the property of the assessee: owner of the property acquired it.
(i) on any distribution of assets Notes –
on the total or partition of a Cost of improvement – To the
HUF; cost of acquisition, the cost of
(ii) under a gift or will by an improvement to the asset,
individual or HUF (by any incurred by the previous owner or
person upto 31.3.2024); the assessee on or after 1.4.2001
must be added.
(iii) by succession, inheritance or
devolution; Period of holding - It may be
noted that section 2(42A) provides
(iv) on any distribution of assets on
that in all such cases, for
the liquidation of a company;
determining the period for which
(v) under a transfer to revocable
the capital asset is held by the
or an irrevocable trust;
transferee, the period of holding
(vi) under any transfer of capital
of the asset by the previous owner
asset by a holding company to
shall also be considered.
its wholly owned subsidiary
Benefit of indexation - The
Indian company or by a
Bombay High Court, in CIT v.
subsidiary company to its
Manjula J. Shah 16 Taxman 42,
100% holding Indian company,
held that the indexed cost of
referred to in section 47(iv)
acquisition in case of gifted asset
and 47(v), respectively;
(vii) under any transfer referred to has to be computed with reference
in section 47(vi) of a capital to the year in which the previous
asset by amalgamating owner first held the asset and not
company to the amalgamated the year in which the assessee
Indian company, in a scheme became the owner of the asset.
of amalgamation; As per the plain reading of the
(viii) under any transfer referred to provisions of section 48, however,
in section 47(vib), of a capital the indexed cost of acquisition
asset by the demerged would be determined by taking CII
company to the resulting for the year in which asset is first
Indian company, in a scheme held by the assessee.
of demerger; The benefit of indexation would be
(ix) by conversion by an individual available for the capital assets
of his separate property into a which are transferred before
HUF property, by the mode 23.7.2024.
referred to in section 64(2).
49(2) Where shares in an amalgamated The cost of acquisition to him of
company which is an Indian the shares in the amalgamated
company become the property of company shall be taken as the
the assessee in consideration of cost of acquisition of the shares
the transfer of shares referred to in in the amalgamating company.
section 47(vii) held by him in the
amalgamating company under a
scheme of amalgamation.
49(2A) Where a person becomes the That part of the cost of
owner of shares or debentures in a debentures, debenture stock, bond
company during the process of or deposit certificate in relation to
conversion of bonds or which such asset (shares or
debentures, debenture stock or debentures) is acquired by that
deposit certificates referred under person.
section 47(x).
49(2AA) Where the capital gain arises from Fair market value which has been
the transfer of specified security or taken into account for perquisite
sweat equity shares referred to in valuation.
section 17(2)(vi)
49(2AE) Where equity shares of a company, That part of the cost of the
became the property of the preference share in relation to
assessee in consideration of which such equity shares are
transfer by way of conversion of acquired by the assessee.
preference shares of the company
[Section 47(xb)]
49(2C) In case of demerger The cost of acquisition of the
shares in the resulting company
shall be the amount which bears
to the cost of acquisition of
shares held by the assessee in the
demerged company the same
proportion as the net book value
of the assets transferred in a
demerger bears to the net worth
of the demerged company
immediately before such
demerger.
Cost of acquisition of shares in
B
the resulting company = A×
C
A = Cost of acquisition of shares
held in the demerged
company
B = Net book value of the assets
transferred in a demerger
C = Net worth of the demerged
company i.e., the aggregate
of the paid up share capital
and general reserves as
appearing in the books of
account of the demerged
company immediately before
the demerger.
49(2D) In case of demerger The cost of acquisition of the
original shares held by the
shareholder in the demerged
company shall be deemed to
have been reduced by the
amount as so arrived under the
sub-section (2C)
49(4) Where the capital gain arises from The value taken into account for
the transfer of such property which the purposes of section 56(2)(x).
has been subject to tax under
section 56(2)(x)
49(9) Where the capital gain arises from The fair market value of the
the transfer of a capital asset inventory as on the date on such
which was used by the assessee as conversion determined in the
inventory earlier before its prescribed manner
conversion into capital asset
49(10) Where a capital asset, being an The cost of gold in the hands of
Electronic Gold Receipt issued by a the person in whose name
Vault Manager became the Electronic Gold Receipt is issued.
property of the person as
consideration for transfer of gold
[Section 47(viid)]
Where gold is released against an The cost of the Electronic Gold
Electronic Gold Receipt, which Receipt in the hands of such
became the property of the person person.
as consideration for transfer of
Electronic Gold Receipt [Section
47(viid)]
4.12 COST OF ACQUISITION [SECTION 55(2)]
Cost of acquisition is the price that the assessee has paid, or the amount that the
assessee has incurred, for acquisition of the asset. Expenses incurred for
completing the title are a part of the cost of acquisition. For eg: Stamp duty.
Cost of acquisition in relation to the following assets is as follows:
(1) Goodwill of a business or profession or a trademark or brand name
associated with a business or profession or any other intangible asset
or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or thing, or
right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage
carriage permits and loom hours, or any other right
(i) In case of acquisition from previous owner: In the case of the above
capital assets, if the assessee has purchased them from a previous owner,
the cost of acquisition means the amount of the purchase price.
Example:
If A purchases a stage carriage permit from B for ` 2 lakhs, ` 2 lakhs will be
the cost of acquisition for A.
However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or
profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been
obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost
of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price
as reduced by the total amount of depreciation (upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained
by the assessee under section 32(1).
(ii) In case of circumstances mentioned under section 49(1)(i)/(ii)/(iii)/(iv):
In cases where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any
of the following modes from the previous owner, and such capital assets
were acquired by the previous owner by purchase, cost of acquisition to the
assessee will be the amount of the purchase price for such previous owner:-
(1) On any distribution of assets on the total or partial partition of a
Hindu undivided family.
(2) Under a gift or will by an individual or HUF (Upto A.Y. 2024-25, gift or
will by any person).
(3) By succession, inheritance or devolution.
(4) On any distribution of assets on the liquidation of a company.
(5) Under a transfer to a revocable or an irrevocable trust.
(6) Under any transfer of a capital asset referred to in –
(i) section 47(iv) – transfer by a holding company to its 100%
subsidiary Indian company;
(ii) section 47(v) – transfer by a subsidiary company to its 100%
holding company, being an Indian company,
(iii) section 47(vi) – transfer in a scheme of amalgamation by the
amalgamating company to the amalgamated company, being an
Indian company
(iv) section 47(vib) – transfer in a demerger, by the demerged
company to the resulting company, being an Indian company.
(7) Where the assessee is a Hindu undivided family, by the mode referred
to in section 64(2) i.e., conversion of self-acquired property of a
member of a HUF into the property of the HUF (For details, read
Chapter 4).
However, in case of a capital asset, being goodwill of a business or
profession, in respect of which depreciation under section 32(1) has been
obtained by the assessee in any previous year (upto P.Y.2019-20), the cost
of acquisition of such goodwill would be the amount of the purchase price
for such previous owner as reduced by the total amount of depreciation
(upto P.Y.2019-20) obtained by the assessee under section 32(1).
(iii) In any other case [i.e., in case of self-generated assets]: In case of self-
generated assets, namely, goodwill of a business or profession or any other
intangible asset or a trademark or brand name associated with a business or
profession or a right to manufacture, produce or process any article or
thing, or right to carry on any business or profession, tenancy rights, stage
carriage permits, or loom hours, or any other right, the cost of acquisition
will be taken to be nil.
(2) Financial assets
Many a time, persons who own shares or other securities become entitled to
subscribe to any additional shares or securities. Further, they are also allotted
additional shares or securities without any payment. Such shares or securities are
referred to as financial assets in Income-tax Act. Section 55 provides the basis for
ascertaining the cost of acquisition of such financial assets.
(i) Original shares (which form the basis of entitlement of rights shares):
In relation to the original financial asset on the basis of which the assessee
becomes entitled to any additional financial assets, cost of acquisition
means the amount actually paid for acquiring the original financial assets.
(ii) Rights entitlement (which is renounced by the assessee in favour of a
person): In relation to any right to renounce the said entitlement to
subscribe to the financial asset, when such a right is renounced by the
assessee in favour of any person, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil
in the case of such assessee.
(iii) Rights shares acquired by the assessee: In relation to the financial asset,
to which the assessee has subscribed on the basis of the said entitlement,
cost of acquisition means the amount actually paid by him for acquiring
such asset.
(iv) Bonus Shares: In relation to the financial asset allotted to the assessee
without any payment and on the basis of holding of any other financial
assets, cost of acquisition shall be taken to be nil in the case of such
assessee.
In other words, where bonus shares are allotted without any payment on
the basis of holding of original shares, the cost of such bonus shares will be
nil in the hands of the original shareholder.
Bonus shares allotted before 01.04.2001 - In respect of bonus shares
allotted before 1.4.2001, although the cost of acquisition of the shares is nil,
the assessee may opt for the fair market value as on 1.4.2001 as the cost of
acquisition of such bonus shares.
Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid at
the time of transfer – In case of transfer of bonus shares allotted before
1.2.2018 on which STT has been paid at the time of transfer, the cost would be
the higher of –
(i) Actual cost of acquisition (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus shares allotted
on or after 1.4.2001; and FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of business shares
allotted before 1.4.2001)
(ii) Lower of –
(a) FMV as on 31.1.2018; and
(b) Actual sale consideration
(v) Rights shares which are purchased by the person in whose favour the
assessee has renounced the rights entitlement: In the case of any
financial asset purchased by the person in whose favour the right to
subscribe to such assets has been renounced, cost of acquisition means the
aggregate of the amount of the purchase price paid by him to the person
renouncing such right and the amount paid by him to the company or
institution for acquiring such financial asset.
(3) Long-term capital assets referred to in section 112A
The cost of acquisition in relation to the long-term capital assets being,
- equity shares in a company on which STT is paid both at the time of
purchase and transfer or
- unit of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid
at the time of transfer.
acquired before 1st February, 2018 shall be the higher of
(i) cost of acquisition of such asset; and
(ii) lower of
(a) the fair market value of such asset; and
(b) the full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of
the transfer of the capital asset.
Meaning of Fair Market value
S. Circumstance Fair Market Value
No.
(i) In a case where the capital If there is trading in such asset
asset is listed on any on such exchange on 31.01.2018
recognized stock exchange The highest price of the capital
as on 31.01.2018 asset quoted on such exchange on
the said date
If there is no trading in such asset
on such exchange on 31.01.2018
The highest price of such asset on
such exchange on a date
immediately preceding 31.01.2018
when such asset was traded on such
exchange.
(ii) In a case where the capital The net asset value of such unit as
asset is a unit which is not on the said date
listed on any recognized
stock exchange as on
31.01.2018
(iii) In a case where the capital An amount which bears to the cost
asset is an equity share in a of acquisition the same proportion
company which is as CII for the financial year 2017-
- not listed on a 18 bears to the CII for the first
recognized stock year in which the asset was held
exchange as on by the assessee or on 01.04.2001,
31.01.2018 but listed on whichever is later.
such exchange on the
date of transfer
- not listed on a recognized
stock exchange as on
31.01.2018 or which
became the property of
the assessee in
consideration of shares
which is not listed on such
exchange as on 31.1.2018
by way of transaction
covered under section 47
but listed on such
exchange subsequent to
the date of transfer
(where transfer is in
respect of sale of unlisted
equity shares under an
offer for sale to the public
included in an initial
public offer)
- listed on a recognized
stock exchange on the
date of transfer and
which became the
property of the assessee
in consideration of share
which is not listed on
such exchange as on
31.01.2018 by way of
transaction not regarded
as transfer under section
47
(4) Any other capital asset
(i) Where the capital asset become the property of the assessee before 1-
4-2001, cost of acquisition means the cost of acquisition of the asset to the
assessee or the fair market value of the asset on 1-4-2001, at the option of
the assessee.
Example: A house property was purchased by Mr. A on 1.1.1992 for ` 30,000
and the fair market value of the same was ` 1,40,000 as on 1.4.2001. Cost of
acquisition of the said property would be ` 1,40,000.
However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair
market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty
value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.
Example: In the above example, if the stamp duty value of the property was
` 1,20,000 as on 1.4.2001, cost of acquisition of such property would be
` 1,20,000, being the stamp value as on 1.4.2001 and not ` 1,40,000.
(ii) Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee by any of
the modes specified in section 49(1): The cost of acquisition to the
assessee will be the cost of acquisition to the previous owner. Even in such
cases, where the capital asset became the property of the previous owner
before 1-4-2001, the assessee can opt the fair market value as on 1-4-2001
as the cost of acquisition.
However, in case of capital asset, being land or building or both, the fair
market value of such asset on 1-4-2001 shall not exceed the stamp duty
value, wherever available, of such asset as on 1-4-2001.
Note: The provisions contained in (i) & (ii) of (4) above shall also apply to the
financial assets mentioned in (i) to (v) of (2) and long term capital assets
referred to in section 112A of (3) above.
(iii) Where the capital asset became the property of the assessee on the
distribution of the capital assets of a company on its liquidation and the
assessee has been assessed to capital gains in respect of that asset under
section 46, the cost of acquisition means the fair market value of the asset
on the date of distribution.
(iv) A share or a stock of a company may become the property of an assessee
under the following circumstances:
(a) the consolidation and division of all or any of the share capital of the
company into shares of larger amount than its existing shares.
(b) the conversion of any shares of the company into stock,
(c) the re-conversion of any stock of the company into shares,
(d) the sub-division of any of the shares of the company into shares of
smaller amount, or
(e) the conversion of one kind of shares of the company into another kind.
In the above circumstances the cost of acquisition to the assessee will mean
the cost of acquisition of the asset calculated with reference to the cost of
acquisition of the shares or stock from which such asset is derived.
(5) Where the cost for which the previous owner acquired the property
cannot be ascertained, the cost of acquisition to the previous owner means
the fair market value on the date on which the capital asset became the
property of the previous owner.
Cost of Acquisition of certain assets: At a Glance
Sl. Nature of asset Cost of acquisition
No.
1 Goodwill of business or profession,
trademark, brand name or any other
intangible asset etc.,
- Self generated Nil
- Acquired from previous owner Purchase price
However, in case of capital asset, Purchase price as reduced by the
being goodwill of a business or total amount of depreciation
profession, in respect of which obtained by the assessee under
depreciation u/s 32(1) has been section 32(1).
obtained by the assessee in any
P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)
- became the property of the Purchase price for such previous
assessee by way of distribution of owner
assets on total or partial partition
of HUF, under a gift or will by an
individual or HUF (by any person
upto 31.3.2024), by succession,
inheritance, distribution of assets
on liquidation of a company, etc.
and previous owner has acquired it
by purchase
However, in case of capital asset, Purchase price for such previous
being goodwill of a business or owner as reduced by the total
profession which was acquired by amount of depreciation obtained by
the previous owner by purchase the assessee u/s 32(1).
and in respect of which
depreciation u/s 32(1) has been
obtained by the assessee in any P.Y.
(upto P.Y.2019-20)
2. Bonus Shares:
Allotted before 1.4.2001 FMV as on 1.4.2001
Allotted on or after 1.4.2001 Nil
Bonus shares allotted before The higher of –
1.2.2018, on which STT has been paid (i) Actual cost of acquisition (i.e.,
at the time of transfer Nil, in case of bonus shares
allotted on or after 1.4.2001; and
FMV on 1.4.2001, in case of
bonus shares allotted before
1.4.2001)
(ii) Lower of –
(a) FMV as on 31.1.2018; and
(b) Actual sale consideration
3. Rights Shares:
Original shares (which form the basis Amount actually paid for acquiring
of entitlement of rights shares) the original shares
Rights entitlement (which is renounced Nil
by the assessee in favour of a person)
Rights shares acquired by the Amount actually paid for acquiring
assessee the rights shares
Rights shares which are purchased by Purchase price paid to the renouncer
the person in whose favour the of rights entitlement as well as the
assessee has renounced the rights amount paid to the company which
entitlement has allotted the rights shares.
4 Long term capital assets being, Cost of acquisition shall be the
- equity shares in a company on higher of
which STT is paid both at the (i) actual cost of acquisition of
time of purchase and transfer such asset; and
or (ii) lower of
- unit of equity oriented fund or - the fair market value of such
unit of business trust on which asset; and
STT is paid at the time of - the full value of consideration
transfer,
received or accruing as a result
acquired before 1st February, of the transfer of the capital
2018 asset.
5 Any other capital asset
Where such capital asset became the Cost of the asset to the assessee, or
property of the assessee before FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option of
1.4.2001 the assessee.
However, in case of capital asset
being land or building, FMV as on
1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp duty
value as on 1.4.2001.
Where capital assets became the Cost to the previous owner or FMV as
property of the assessee by way of on 1.4.2001, at the option of the
distribution of assets on total or assessee.
partial partition of HUF, under a gift However, in case of capital asset
or will by an individual or HUF (by being land or building, FMV as on
any person upto 31.3.2024), by 1.4.2001 shall not exceed stamp
succession, inheritance, distribution duty value as on 1.4.2001.
of assets on liquidation of a
company, etc. and the capital asset
became the property of the previous
owner before 1.4.2001.
The provisions contained in (5) above shall also apply to the assets mentioned
in (3) and (4) above.
6 Where cost of the property in the The FMV on the date on which the
hands of previous owner cannot be capital asset become the property
ascertained of the previous owner would be
considered as cost of acquisition.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Mr. A converts his capital asset acquired for an amount of ` 50,000 in June, 2004 into
stock-in-trade in the month of November, 2023. The fair market value of the asset on
the date of conversion is ` 4,50,000. The stock-in-trade was sold for an amount of
` 6,50,000 in the month of September, 2024. What will be the tax treatment?
Financial year Cost Inflation Index
2004-05 113
2023-24 348
2024-25 363
SOLUTION
The capital gains on the sale of the capital asset converted to stock-in-trade is
taxable in the given case. It arises in the year of conversion (i.e. P.Y. 2023-24) but
will be taxable only in the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold (i.e. P.Y. 2024-
25). Profits from business will also be taxable in the year of sale of the stock-in-
trade (P.Y. 2024-25).
The LTCG and business income for the A.Y.2025-26 are calculated as under:
Particulars
` `
Profits and Gains from Business or Profession
Sale proceeds of the stock-in-trade 6,50,000
Less: Cost of the stock-in-trade (FMV on the date of 4,50,000 2,00,000
conversion)
Long Term Capital Gains
Full value of the consideration (FMV on the date of the 4,50,000
conversion)
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (` 50,000 x 348/113) 1,53,982 2,96,018
Note: For the purpose of indexation, the cost inflation index of the year in which
the asset is converted into stock-in-trade should be considered.
Since the transfer (conversion into stock-in-trade) took place in the P.Y. 2023-24,
the benefit of indexation would be available. The date of sale of stock-in trade is
not relevant for determining whether benefit of indexation would be available.
4.13 COST OF IMPROVEMENT [SECTION 55(1)]
(1) Goodwill or any other intangible asset of a business, etc. [Section
55(1)(b)(1)]: In relation to a capital asset being goodwill or any other
intangible asset of a business or a right to manufacture, produce or process
any article or thing, or right to carry on any business or profession or any
other right, the cost of improvement shall be taken to be Nil.
(2) Any other capital asset [Section 55(1)(b)(2)]:
Circumstance Cost of improvement
(i) Where the capital asset became the property of the previous
owner or the assessee before 1.4.2001
(a) In a case covered u/s 49(1), All expenditure of a capital
where the capital asset nature incurred in making any
became the property of the addition or alteration to the
previous owner and the capital asset on or after
assessee before 1.4.2001 1.4.2001 by the assessee.
(b) In a case covered u/s 49(1), All expenditure of a capital
where the capital asset nature incurred in making any
became the property of the addition or alteration to the
previous owner before capital asset on or after
1.4.2001 but became the 1.4.2001 by the previous
property of the assessee on or owner and the assessee.
after 1.4.2001
(c) In a case not covered u/s All expenditure of a capital
49(1) nature incurred in making any
addition or alteration to the
capital asset on or after
1.4.2001 by the assessee.
(ii) Where the capital asset became the property of the previous
owner and the assessee on or after 1.4.2001
(a) In a case covered u/s 49(1) All expenditure of a capital
nature incurred in making any
addition or alteration to the
capital asset by the previous
owner and the assessee.
(b) In a case not covered u/s All expenditure of a capital nature
49(1) incurred in making any addition
or alteration to the capital asset
by the assessee after it became
the assessee’s property.
In a nutshell, in a case covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement
would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to
the capital asset by the previous owner or the assessee or both on or after
1.4.2001. In a case not covered under section 49(1), cost of improvement
would include expenditure of a capital nature on addition or alteration to
the capital asset by the assessee on or after 1.4.2001.
However, cost of improvement does not include any expenditure which is
deductible in computing the income chargeable under the head “Income
from house property”, “Profits and gains of business or profession” or
“Income from other sources”. Routine expenses on repairs and maintenance
do not form part of cost of improvement.
4.14COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN
CASE OF DEPRECIABLE ASSETS
[SECTIONS 50 & 50A]
(1) Transfer of depreciable assets [Section 50]: Section 50 provides for the
computation of capital gains in case of depreciable assets. It may be noted
that where the capital asset is a depreciable asset forming part of a block of
assets, section 50 will have over-riding effect in spite of anything contained
in section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset.
Accordingly, where the capital asset is an asset forming part of a block of
assets in respect of which depreciation has been allowed, the provisions of
sections 48 and 49 shall be subject to the following modification:
• Where the full value of consideration received or accruing for the transfer
of the asset plus the full value of such consideration for the transfer of
any other capital asset falling with the block of assets during previous
year exceeds the aggregate of the following amounts namely:
(1) expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with
such transfer;
(2) WDV of the block of assets at the beginning of the previous
year;
(3) the actual cost of any asset falling within the block of assets
acquired during the previous year
such excess shall be deemed to be the capital gains arising from the
transfer of short-term capital assets.
• Where all assets in a block are transferred during the previous year,
the block itself will cease to exist. In such a situation, the difference
between the sale value of the assets and the WDV of the block of
assets at the beginning of the previous year together with the actual
cost of any asset falling within that block of assets acquired by the
assessee during the previous year will be deemed to be the capital
gains arising from the transfer of short-term capital assets.
Transfer of depreciable assets : Tax
consequences
No Yes
Is V > C ? Does the block C (-) V
cease to exist? is STCL
Yes No
V (-) C is C (-) V is the Closing
STCG WDV of the block
Symbol Description
V Full value of consideration
C Opening WDV of Block (+) Actual Cost of Asset acquired in the Block
during the P.Y. (+) Expenses in connection with transfer of asset
STCG Short Term Capital Gain
STCL Short Term Capital Loss
WDV Written Down Value
(2) Cost of acquisition in case of power sector assets [Section 50A]: With
respect to the power sector, in case of depreciable assets referred to in
section 32(1)(i), the provisions of sections 48 and 49 shall apply subject to
the modification that the WDV of the asset [as defined in section 43(6)], as
adjusted, shall be taken to be the cost of acquisition.
ILLUSTRATION 9
Singhania & Co., a sole proprietorship owns six machines, put in use for business in
March, 2023. The depreciation on these machines is charged@15%. The opening
balance of these machines after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24 was
` 8,50,000. Three of the old machines were sold on 10th June, 2024 for ` 11,00,000.
A second hand plant was bought for ` 8,50,000 on 30th November, 2024.
You are required to:
(i) determine the claim of depreciation for Assessment Year 2025-26.
(ii) compute the capital gains liable to tax for Assessment Year 2025-26.
(iii) If Singhania & Co. had sold the three machines in June, 2024 for ` 21,00,000,
will there be any difference in your above workings? Explain.
SOLUTION
(i) Computation of depreciation for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
`
Opening balance of the block as on 1.4.2024 [i.e., W.D.V. as 8,50,000
on 31.3.2024 after providing depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24]
Add: Purchase of second-hand plant during the year 8,50,000
17,00,000
Less: Sale consideration of old machinery during the year 11,00,000
W.D.V of the block as on 31.03.2025 6,00,000
Since the value of the block as on 31.3.2025 comprises of a new asset which
has been put to use for less than 180 days, depreciation is restricted to 50%
of the prescribed percentage of 15% i.e. depreciation is restricted to 7½%.
Therefore, the depreciation allowable for the year is ` 45,000, being 7½% of
` 6,00,000.
(ii) The provisions under section 50 for computation of capital gains in the case
of depreciable assets can be invoked only under the following
circumstances:
(a) When one or some of the assets in the block are sold for
consideration more than the value of the block.
(b) When all the assets are transferred for a consideration more than the
value of the block.
(c) When all the assets are transferred for a consideration less than the
value of the block.
Since in the first two cases, the sale consideration is more than the written
down value of the block, the computation would result in short term capital
gains.
In the third case, since the written down value of the block exceeds the sale
consideration, the resultant figure would be a short-term capital loss of the block.
In the given case, capital gains will not arise as the block of asset continues
to exist, and some of the assets are sold for a price which is lesser than the
written down value of the block.
(iii) If the three machines are sold in June, 2024 for ` 21,00,000, then short term
capital gains would arise, since the sale consideration is more than the
aggregate of the written down value of the block at the beginning of the
year and the additions made during the year.
Particulars
` `
Sale consideration 21,00,000
Less: Opening balance of the block as on 1.4.2024 8,50,000
[i.e., W.D.V. as on 31.3.2024 after providing
depreciation for P.Y. 2023-24]
Purchase of second plant during the year 8,50,000 17,00,000
Short term capital gains 4,00,000
4.15 COMPUTATION OF CAPITAL GAINS IN
CASE OF MARKET LINKED DEBENTURES
[SECTIONS 50AA]
(1) Transfer of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund or Market Linked Debenture
or unlisted bond or unlisted debenture: Section 50AA provides for the
computation of capital gains in case of transfer or redemption or maturity of
- unit(s) of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or
- a Market Linked Debenture or
- an unlisted bond or unlisted debentures which is transferred or redeemed
or matures on or after 23.7.2024.
Section 50AA will have an overriding effect in spite of anything contained in
section 2(42A) which defines a short-term capital asset and section 48
providing the manner of computation of capital gains.
Accordingly, capital gain arising from the transfer or redemption or maturity
of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or Market
Linked Debenture or an unlisted bond or unlisted debentures which is
transferred or redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024 would be deemed to
be short term capital gains and chargeable to tax at normal rate of tax.
(2) Computation of capital gains: The full value of consideration received or
accruing as a result of the transfer or redemption or maturity of such
debenture or unit or bond as reduced by the cost of acquisition of the
debenture or unit and the expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in
connection with such transfer or redemption or maturity would be deemed
to be the capital gains.
(3) No deduction in respect of STT: No deduction would be allowed in
computing the income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” in respect
of any sum paid on account of securities transaction tax (STT) under Chapter
VII of the Finance (No.2) Act, 2004.
(4) Meaning of certain terms:
S. No. Term Meaning
(i) Market A security
Linked (i) which has an underlying principal component
Debenture in the form of debt security; and
(ii) where the returns are linked to market
returns on other underlying securities or
indices.
It includes any security classified or regulated as
a market linked debenture by the SEBI.
(ii) Specified A Mutual Fund where not more than 35% of its
Mutual Fund total proceeds is invested in the equity shares of
domestic companies.
However, the percentage of equity shareholding
held in respect of the Specified Mutual Fund
shall be computed with reference to the annual
average of the daily closing figures.
4.16 CAPITAL GAINS IN RESPECT OF SLUMP
SALE [SECTION 50B]
(1) Meaning of slump sale [Section 2(42C)] – Slump sale means transfer of one
or more undertakings, by any means, for a lump sum consideration without
values being assigned to the individual assets and liabilities in such transfer.
Term Meaning
Undertaking It includes any part of an undertaking, or a unit or division
[Explanation 1] of an undertaking or a business activity taken as a whole,
but does not include individual assets or liabilities or any
combination thereof not constituting a business activity.
Transfer Meaning assigned to it in section 2(47) [It would include
[Explanation 3] sale, exchange, relinquishment of capital asset,
extinguishment of any rights therein, compulsory
acquisition under any law etc. – See detailed definition in
page 3.374]
Note - The determination of the value of an asset or liability for the sole purpose
of payment of stamp duty, registration fees or other similar taxes or fees shall
not be regarded as assignment of values to individual assets or liabilities.
(2) Capital gains – Whether long-term or short-term? [Section 50B(1)] - Any
profits or gains arising from the slump sale of one or more undertakings held
for more than 36 months, shall be chargeable to income-tax as capital gains
arising from the transfer of long-term capital assets and shall be deemed to be
the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place.
Any profits and gains arising from such transfer of one or more
undertakings held by the assessee for not more than 36 months shall be
deemed to be short-term capital gains.
(3) Deemed cost of acquisition and cost of improvement [Section
50B(2)(i)] -The net worth of the undertaking or the division, as the case
may be, shall be deemed to be the cost of acquisition and the cost of
improvement for the purposes of sections 48 and 49 in relation to capital
assets of such undertaking or division transferred. No indexation benefit
would be available even if it is results in a long-term capital gain,
irrespective of the date of transfer of the undertaking i.e., whether before or
on or after 23.7.2024.
(4) Deemed full value of consideration [Section 50B(2)(ii)] – Fair market value
of the capital assets as on the date of transfer, calculated in the prescribed
manner, shall be deemed to be the full value of the consideration received or
accruing as a result of the transfer of such capital asset.
Accordingly, the CBDT has prescribed that, for the purpose of section 50B(2)(ii),
the fair market value (FMV) of capital assets would be the higher of –
(i) FMV 1, being the fair market value of capital assets transferred by way
of slump sale (determined on the date of slump sale); and
(ii) FMV 2, being the fair market value of the consideration (monetary and
non-monetary) received or accruing as a result of transfer by way of
slump sale
(5) Report of a Chartered Accountant [Section 50B(3)] - Every assessee, in
the case of slump sale, shall furnish in the prescribed form on or before 30th
September of the A.Y. [i.e., the specified date referred under section 44AB,
being the date one month prior to the due date for filing return of income
under section 139(1)], a report of a chartered accountant indicating the
computation of net worth of the undertaking or division, as the case may
be, and certifying that the net worth of the undertaking or division has been
correctly arrived at in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(6) Meaning of Certain Terms:
Explanation Term Particulars
1 Net worth Aggregate value of total assets of the
undertaking or division as reduced by the
value of liabilities of such undertaking or
division as appearing in the books of
account.
However, any change in the value of
assets on account of revaluation of assets
shall not be considered for this purpose
2 Aggregate In the case of depreciable assets: The
value of total written down value of block of assets
assets of determined in accordance with the
undertaking provisions contained in sub-item (C) of
or division item (i) of section 43(6)(c);
In case of capital asset, being goodwill
of a business or profession, which has
not been acquired by the assessee by
purchase from a previous owner [Self-
generated goodwill]: Nil
Capital asset in respect of which 100%
deduction is claimed: In case of capital
assets in respect of which the whole of
the expenditure has been allowed or is
allowable as a deduction under section
35AD: Nil;
For all other assets: Book value
Capital Gains on Slump Sale of an Undertaking [Section 50B]
Is the undertaking held for more than 36 months before transfer?
Yes No
Resultant capital gain is LTCG Resultant capital gain is STCG
(No indexation benefit would be available)
LTCG is taxable@ 20% if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
Normal rates of taxation
LTCG is taxable@ 12.5% if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
Computation of capital gains on slump sale
Full value of Consideration = Fair market
(-) Deemed cost of acquisition/cost
value of the capital asset on the date of
of Improvement
transfer (Higher of FMV1 and FMV2)
Net Worth
Value of liabilities of the
Aggregate value of total assets
(-)
of the undertaking*
undertaking appearing in the
books of account
In case of Self-generated In case of capital In case
depreciable goodwill of a assets where the of
assets business or whole exp. has other
profession
been allowed u/s assets
35AD
WDV as per
(+)
section 43(6)(c) Nil (+) Nil (+) Book value
* Ignore revaluation effect
ILLUSTRATION 10
Mr. A is a proprietor of Akash Enterprises, having 2 units. He transferred on
1.4.2024 his Unit 1 by way of slump sale for a total consideration of ` 25 lakhs. The
fair market value of capital assets of unit 1 on 1.4.2024 is ` 30 lakhs. Unit 1 was
started in the year 2005-06. The expenses incurred for this transfer were ` 28,000.
His Balance Sheet as on 31.3.2024 is as under:
Liabilities Total Assets Unit 1(`) Unit 2 Total
(`)
(`) (`)
Own Capital 15,00,000 Land 12,00,000 2,00,000 14,00,000
Revaluation Reserve 3,00,000 Machinery 3,00,000 1,00,000 4,00,000
(for land of unit 1)
Bank loan (70% for 2,00,000 Debtors 1,00,000 40,000 1,40,000
unit 1)
Trade creditors Other assets
(25% for unit 1) 1,50,000 1,50,000 60,000 2,10,000
Total 21,50,000 Total 17,50,000 4,00,000 21,50,000
Other information:
(i) Revaluation reserve is created by revising upward the value of the land of Unit 1.
(ii) No individual value of any asset is considered in the transfer deed.
(iii) Other assets of Unit 1 include patents acquired on 1.7.2022 for ` 50,000 on
which no depreciation has been charged.
(iv) The value of machinery represents the written down value as per the Income-
tax Act, 1961.
Compute the capital gain for the assessment year 2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of capital gains on slump sale of Unit 1
Particulars
`
Full value of consideration [Higher of FMV of capital assets of Unit 30,00,000
1 on 1.4.2024 or FMV of monetary consideration received]
Less: Expenses for transfer 28,000
29,72,000
Less: Net worth (See Note 1 below) 12,50,625
Long-term capital gain 17,21,375
Notes:
1. Computation of net worth of Unit 1 of Akash Enterprises
Particulars
` `
Land (excluding ` 3 lakhs on account of 9,00,000
revaluation)
Machinery 3,00,000
Debtors 1,00,000
Patents (See Note 2 below) 28,125
Other assets (` 1,50,000 – ` 50,000) 1,00,000
Total assets 14,28,125
Less: Creditors (25% of ` 1,50,000) 37,500
Bank Loan (70% of ` 2,00,000) 1,40,000 1,77,500
Net worth 12,50,625
2. Written down value of patents as on 1.4.2024
Value of patents:
`
Cost as on 1.7.2022 50,000
Less: Depreciation @ 25% for Financial Year 2022-23 12,500
Balance as on 1.4.2023 37,500
Less: Depreciation for Financial Year 2023-24 9,375
Balance as on 1.4.2024 28,125
3. Since the Unit is held for more than 36 months, capital gain arising would
be long term capital gain. However, indexation benefit is not available in
case of slump sale.
4.17 DEEMED FULL VALUE OF CONSIDERATION
FOR COMPUTING CAPITAL GAINS
[SECTIONS 50C, 50CA & 50D]
S. Capital Section Circumstance Deemed Full
No. Asset Value of
consideration
for computing
Capital Gains
1. Land or 50C (1) If Stamp Duty Value >110% of Stamp Duty Value
Building or consideration received or accruing
both as a result of transfer
(a) If date of agreement is Stamp Duty Value
different from the date of on the date of
transfer and whole or part of agreement
the consideration is received
by way of account payee
cheque or account payee bank
draft or ECS or through such
other prescribed electronic
modes (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT,
Net banking, debit card, credit
card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on
or before the date of
agreement
(b) If date of agreement is Stamp Duty Value
different from the date of on the date of
transfer but the whole or part transfer
of the consideration has not
been received by way of
account payee cheque or
account payee bank draft or
ECS or through such other
prescribed electronic mode
on or before the date of
agreement.
However, if the stamp duty value on Consideration so
the date of agreement or the date of received
transfer, as the case may be ≤ 110%
of the sale consideration received
Example
Let us take a case where for transfer of
building –
• the actual consideration is
` 100 lakh;
• the stamp duty value on the date of
agreement is ` 109 lakh; and
• the stamp duty value on the date of
transfer is ` 112 lakh
(i) If any part of the consideration is
paid by prescribed electronic mode
on or before the date of agreement
The actual consideration of
` 100 lakh would be the full value of
consideration, since stamp duty value
of ` 109 lakhs on the date of
agreement does not exceed 110% of
actual consideration of ` 100 lakhs.
(ii) If no part of the consideration is
paid by prescribed electronic mode
on or before the date of agreement
Stamp duty value of ` 112 lakhs on
the date of transfer would be the full
value of consideration, since the
same exceeds 110% of actual
consideration of ` 100 lakhs.
(2) Where the Assessing Officer refers
the valuation to a Valuation Officer,
on the assessee’s claim that the
stamp duty value exceeds the FMV
of the property on the date of
transfer and the stamp duty value
has not been disputed in any appeal
or revision or no reference has been
made before any other authority,
court or High Court
(a) If Valuation by Valuation Officer Stamp Duty Value
> Stamp Duty Value
(b) If Valuation by Valuation Officer Valuation by
< Stamp Duty Value Valuation Officer
155(15) (3) If stamp duty value has been adopted Value so revised
as full value of consideration, and in such appeal or
subsequently the value is revised in revision
any appeal or revision
2. Unquoted 50CA If consideration received or accruing as a FMV of such
shares result of transfer < FMV of such share share determined
determined in the prescribed manner in the prescribed
The provisions of this section would not, manner
however, be applicable to any
consideration received or accruing as a
result of transfer by such class of persons
and subject to such conditions as may be
prescribed.
3. Any Capital 50D Where the consideration received or FMV of the said
asset accruing as a result of the transfer of a asset on the date
capital asset by an assessee is not of transfer
ascertainable or cannot be determined
Meaning of certain terms:
S. Term Section Meaning
No.
(i) Stamp 50C The value adopted or assessed or assessable by
Duty any authority of a State Government (Stamp
Value Valuation Authority) for the purpose of payment
of stamp duty
(ii) Assessable 50C The term ‘assessable’ has been defined to mean
the price which the stamp valuation authority
would have, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other law for the time
being in force, adopted or assessed, if it were
referred to such authority for the purposes of the
payment of stamp duty. The term “assessable”
has been added to cover transfers executed
through power of attorney.
(iii) Quoted 50CA The share quoted on any recognized stock
Shares exchange with regularity from time to time,
where the quotation of such share is based on
current transaction made in the ordinary course
of business.
Note – The valuation rules prescribed in Rule 11UA for valuation of unquoted
equity shares would be dealt with at the Final level.
4.18 ADVANCE MONEY RECEIVED [SECTION 51]
It is possible for an assessee to receive some advance in regard to the transfer of
capital asset. Due to the break-down of the negotiation, the assessee may have
retained the advance.
Section 51 provides that while calculating capital gains, the above advance
retained by the assessee must go to reduce the cost of acquisition. However, if
advance has been received and retained by the previous owner and not the assessee
himself, then the same will not go to reduce the cost of acquisition of the assessee.
Section 56(2)(ix) provides for the taxability of any sum of money, received as an
advance or otherwise in the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset.
Consequently, such sum shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head
‘Income from other sources’, if such sum is forfeited on or after 1st April, 2014 and
the negotiations do not result in transfer of such capital asset.
In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and retained, section
51 provides that where any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in
the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset has been included in the
total income of the assessee for any previous year in accordance with section
56(2)(ix), then, such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for which the
asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair market value, as the case
may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.
However, any such sum of money forfeited before 1st April, 2014, will be deducted
from the cost of acquisition for computing capital gains.
Tax treatment of advance money forfeited on
failure of negotiations for transfer of a capital
asset [Sections 51 & 56(2)(ix)]
If advance was If advance was
received and received and
forfeited before forfeited on or
1-4-2014 after 1-4-2014
Advance forfeited to be deducted
Advance forfeited to be taxed
while determining Cost of
under 56(2)(ix) as Income from
acquisition for computing capital
other sources
gains
Taxability is postponed to
Tax liability is attracted
the year of actual transfer
in the year of forfeiture
of capital asset.
of advance
4.19 EXEMPTION OF CAPITAL GAINS
Exemption of Capital Gains
Exemptions under section
Exemptions under Section 10
54/54B/54D/54EC/54F
I. Exemptions under section 10
Exemption of capital gains on compulsory acquisition of agricultural land
situated within specified urban limits [Section 10(37)]
With a view to mitigate the hardship faced by the farmers whose agricultural land
situated in specified urban limits has been compulsorily acquired, clause (37) of
section 10 exempts the capital gains arising to an individual or a HUF from
transfer of agricultural land by way of compulsory acquisition.
Such exemption is available where the compensation or the enhanced
compensation or consideration, as the case may be, is received on or after 1.4.2004.
The exemption is available only when such land has been used for agricultural
purposes during the preceding two years immediately preceding the date of
transfer by such individual or a parent of his or by such HUF.
II. Exemption of Capital Gains under section 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F
(i) Capital Gains on sale of residential house [Section 54]
Eligible assessees – Individual & HUF
Conditions to be fulfilled
• There should be a transfer of residential house (buildings or lands
appurtenant thereto)
• It must be a long-term capital asset
• Income from such house should be chargeable under the head
“Income from house property”
• Where the amount of capital gains exceeds ` 2 crore
Where the amount of capital gain exceeds ` 2 crore, one residential
house in India should be –
 purchased within 1 year before or 2 years after the date of
transfer; (or)
 constructed within a period of 3 years after the date of transfer.
Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore
Where the amount of capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore, the
assessee i.e., individual or HUF, may at his option,
 purchase two residential houses in India within 1 year before
or 2 years after the date of transfer (or)
 construct two residential houses in India within a period of 3
years after the date of transfer.
Where during any assessment year, the assessee has exercised the
option to purchase or construct two residential houses in India, he
shall not be subsequently entitled to exercise the option for the same
or any other assessment year.
This implies that if an assessee has availed the option of claiming
benefit of section 54 in respect of purchase of two residential houses
in Jaipur and Jodhpur, say, in respect of capital gains of ` 1.50 crores
arising from transfer of residential house at Bombay in the
P.Y. 2024-25, then, he will not be entitled to avail the benefit of
section 54 again in respect of purchase of two residential houses in,
say, Pune and Baroda, in respect of capital gains of ` 1.20 crores
arising from transfer of residential house in Jaipur in the P.Y. 2027-28,
even though the capital gains arising on transfer of the residential
house at Jaipur does not exceed ` 2 crore.
• If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of
income, then, the capital gain has to be deposited under the Capital
Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) [Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this sub-
heading]. However, the capital gain in excess of ` 10 crore would not
be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS.
• Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase or construction of new
asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be the cost of
new asset. The deemed cost of the new asset would be restricted to
` 10 crores for the purpose of exemption under section 54.
Quantum of Exemption
• If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be ≥ long
term capital gains, entire long term capital gains is exempt.
• If cost of new residential house or houses, as the case may be < long
term capital gains, long term capital gains to the extent of cost of new
residential house is exempt.
However, if the cost of new residential house(s) exceeds ` 10 crores, the
amount exceeding ` 10 crore would not be taken into account for
exemption. It means the maximum exemption that can be claimed by the
assessee u/s 54 is ` 10 crore.
Examples:
1. If the long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and the cost of the new house
is ` 3 crore, then, the entire long-term capital gains of ` 2.05 crore is
exempt.
2. If long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and cost of new house is ` 1.55
crore, then, long-term capital gains is exempt only upto ` 1.55 crore.
Balance ` 50 lakhs is taxable/s 112.
Example
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
LTCG Cost of new Amount in Exempt LTCG
S.No. computed residential column (3) or [Lower of
house ` 10 crore, column (2) and
whichever is column (4)]
lower
(1) ` 7 crore ` 12 crore ` 10 crore ` 7 crore
(2) ` 12 crore ` 14 crore ` 10 crore ` 10 crore
(3) ` 11 crore ` 9 crore ` 9 crore ` 9 crore
(4) ` 15 crore ` 13 crore ` 10 crore ` 10 crore
Examples
1. If the LTCG is ` 8 crore and the assessee has incurred ` 5 crore in
construction of new residential house upto the due date u/s 139(1) i.e.,
31.7.2025/ 31.10.2025, as the case may be, then, as per section 54(2),
he can deposit the amount of ` 3 crore not appropriated by him towards
construction of house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, in
Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS) for claiming exemption under
section 54. If he deposits, say, ` 2 crore, in CGAS on or before the due
date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house would be
` 7 crore (` 5 crore +` 2 crore). The amount exempt u/s 54 would be ` 7
crore.
2. If the LTCG is ` 14 crore and the assessee has already incurred ` 7 crore
in construction of new residential house upto 31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as
the case may be, then, as per section 54(2), he can deposit the
difference of ` 3 crore (` 10 crore - ` 7 crore) in CGAS for claiming
exemption u/s 54. If he deposits, say, ` 2 crore in CGAS on or before the
due date u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of the new residential house
would be ` 9 crore (` 7 crore + ` 2 crore). The amount exempt under
section 54 would be ` 9 crore.
Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years
• If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its
acquisition or construction, then cost of the asset will be reduced by
capital gains exempted earlier for computing capital gains.
• Example: The long-term capital gains is ` 2.05 crore and the cost of the
new house is ` 3 crore, the entire long-term capital gains of ` 2.05 crore
will be exempt. If the new house was sold after 18 months for ` 5 crore,
then, short term capital gain chargeable to tax would be –
Particulars
`
Net Consideration 5,00,00,000
Less: Cost of acquisition minus capital gains exempt
earlier (` 3,00,00,000 – ` 2 ,05,00,000) 95,00,000
Short term capital gains chargeable to tax 4,05,00,000
ILLUSTRATION 11
Mr. Cee purchased a residential house on July 20, 2022 for ` 10,00,000 and made
some additions to the house incurring ` 2,00,000 in August 2022. He sold the house
property in April 2024 for ` 20,00,000. Out of the sale proceeds, he spent
` 5,00,000 to purchase another house property in September 2024.
What is the amount of capital gains taxable in the hands of Mr. Cee for the A.Y.2025-26?
SOLUTION
The house is sold before 24 months from the date of purchase. Hence, the house
is a short-term capital asset and no benefit of indexation would be available.
Particulars
`
Sale consideration 20,00,000
Less: Cost of acquisition 10,00,000
Cost of improvement 2,00,000
Short-term capital gains 8,00,000
Note - The exemption of capital gains under section 54 is available only in case of
long-term capital asset. As the house is short-term capital asset, Mr. Cee cannot
claim exemption under section 54. Thus, the amount of taxable short-term capital
gains is ` 8,00,000.
(ii) Capital gains on transfer of agricultural land [Section 54B]
Eligible assessee – Individual & HUF
Conditions to be fulfilled
• There should be a transfer of urban agricultural land.
• Such land must have been used for agricultural purposes by the
assessee, being an individual or his parent, or a HUF in the 2 years
immediately preceding the date of transfer.
• He should purchase another agricultural land (urban or rural) within 2
years from the date of transfer.
• If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of
income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS
(Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading.). Amount utilized by the
assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall
be deemed to be the cost of new asset.
Quantum of exemption
• If cost of new agricultural land ≥ capital gains, entire capital gains is
exempt.
• If cost of new agricultural land < capital gains, capital gains to the extent
of cost of new agricultural land is exempt.
Examples:
1. If the capital gains is ` 3 lakhs and the cost of the new agricultural land is ` 4
lakhs, then, the entire capital gains of ` 3 lakhs is exempt.
2. If capital gains is ` 3 lakhs and cost of new agricultural land is ` 2 lakhs,
then, capital gains is exempt only upto ` 2 lakhs.
Consequences of transfer of new agricultural land before 3 years
• If the new agricultural land is transferred before 3 years from the date of
its acquisition, then cost of the land will be reduced by capital gains
exempted earlier for computing capital gains of new agricultural land.
• However, if the new agricultural land is a rural agricultural land, there
would be no capital gains on transfer of such land.
• Continuing in the above example 1, if the new agricultural land (urban
land) is sold after, say, 1 year for ` 6 lakhs, then short term capital gain
chargeable to tax would be –
Particulars
`
Net consideration 6,00,000
Less: Cost of acquisition minus capital gains exempt earlier 1,00,000
(` 4,00,000 – ` 3,00,000)
Short-term capital gains chargeable to tax 5,00,000
(iii) Capital Gains on transfer by way of compulsory acquisition of land and
building of an industrial undertaking [Section 54D]
Eligible assessee – Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled
• There must be compulsory acquisition of land and building or any
right in land or building forming part of an industrial undertaking.
• The land and building should have been used by the assessee for
purposes of the business of the industrial undertaking in the 2 years
immediately preceding the date of transfer.
• The assessee must purchase any other land or building or construct
any building (for shifting or re-establishing the existing undertaking or
setting up a new industrial undertaking) within 3 years from the date
of transfer.
• If such investment is not made before the date of filing of return of
income, then the capital gain has to be deposited under the CGAS.
(Refer point (vi) and (vii) of this sub-heading). Amount utilized by the
assessee for purchase of new asset and the amount so deposited shall
be deemed to be the cost of new asset.
Quantum of exemption
• If cost of new asset ≥ Capital gains, entire capital gains is exempt.
• If cost of new asset < Capital gains, capital gains to the extent of cost
of new asset is exempt.
Note: The exemption in respect of capital gains from transfer of capital
asset would be available even in respect of short-term capital asset, being
land or building or any right in any land or building, provided such capital
asset is used by assessee for the industrial undertaking belonging to him,
even if he was not the owner for the said period of 2 years.
Consequences of transfer of new asset before 3 years
• If the new asset is transferred before 3 years from the date of its
acquisition, then cost of the asset will be reduced by capital gains
exempted earlier for computing capital gains.
(iv) Capital Gains not chargeable on investment in certain bonds [Section 54EC]
Eligible assessee – Any assessee
Conditions to be fulfilled
• There should be transfer of a long-term capital asset being land or
building or both.
• Such asset can also be a depreciable asset (in this case, building) held
for more than 24 months9.
• The capital gains arising from such transfer should be invested in a
long-term specified asset within 6 months from the date of transfer.
• Long-term specified asset means specified bonds, redeemable after
5 years, issued on or after 1.4.2018 by the National Highways
Authority of India (NHAI) or the Rural Electrification Corporation
Limited (RECL) or any other bond notified by the Central Government
in this behalf [Bonds of Power Finance Corporation (PFC) and Indian
Railways Finance Corporation (IRFC)].
• The assessee should not transfer or convert or avail loan or advance
on the security of such bonds for a period of 5 years from the date of
acquisition of such bonds.
Quantum of exemption
• Capital gains or amount invested in specified bonds, whichever is lower.
• The maximum investment which can be made in notified bonds or
bonds of NHAI and RECL, out of capital gains arising from transfer of
one or more assets, during the previous year in which the original
asset is transferred and in the subsequent financial year cannot
exceed ` 50 lakhs.
Violation of condition
• In case of transfer or conversion of such bonds or availing loan or
advance on security of such bonds before the expiry of 5 years, the
capital gain exempted earlier shall be taxed as long-term capital gain
in the year of violation of condition.
9 CIT v. Dempo Company Ltd (2016) 387 ITR 354 (SC)
ILLUSTRATION 12
Long term capital gain of ` 75 lakhs arising from transfer of building on
1.5.2024 will be exempt from tax if such capital gain is invested in the bonds
redeemable after five years, issued by NHAI under section 54EC. Examine with
reasons whether the given statement is true or false having regard to the
provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
SOLUTION
False: The exemption under section 54EC has been restricted, by limiting
the maximum investment in long term specified assets (i.e. bonds of NHAI
or RECL or any other bond notified by Central Government in this behalf,
redeemable after 5 years) to ` 50 lakhs, whether such investment is made
during the relevant previous year or the subsequent previous year, or both.
Therefore, in this case, the exemption under section 54EC can be availed
only to the extent of ` 50 lakhs, provided the investment is made before
1.11.2024 (i.e., within six months from the date of transfer).
Exemption of Long-term capital gains on sale of residential house
Investment in one or two residential Investment in bonds of NHAI/RECL
houses, as the case may be, in India or any other notified bond
Exemption u/s 54 Exemption u/s 54EC*
Purchase within 1 year before or 2
Investment within 6 months
years after and construction within
from the date of transfer
3 years after the date of transfer
Capital Gains or amount invested in
Capital Gains or Cost of new house
bonds, whichever is lower, is exempt
(subject to a maximum of ` 10
maximum upto ` 50 lakhs
crore) whichever is lower, is exempt
*The exemption under section 54EC is available in respect of capital gains on transfer of
capital asset being land or building or both.
(v) Capital gains in case of investment in residential house [Section 54F]
Eligible assessees: Individuals/ HUF
Conditions to be fulfilled
• There must be transfer of a long-term capital asset, not being a
residential house.
• Transfer of plot of land is also eligible for exemption
• The assessee should -
 Purchase one residential house situated in India within a
period of 1 year before or 2 years after the date of transfer; or
 Construct one residential house in India within 3 years from
the date of transfer.
 If such investment is not made before the date of filing of
return of income, then, the net sale consideration has to be
deposited under the CGAS. (Refer points (vi) and (vii) of this
sub-heading). However, the net consideration in excess of
` 10 crore would not be taken into account for the purpose of
deposit in CGAS.
 Amount utilized by the assessee for purchase or construction of
new asset and the amount so deposited shall be deemed to be
the cost of new asset. The deemed cost of new asset would be
restricted to ` 10 crores for the purpose of exemption under
section 54F.
• The assessee should not own more than one residential house on the
date of transfer.
• The assessee should not –
 purchase any other residential house within a period of 2 years or
 construct any other residential house within a period of 3 years
from the date of transfer of the original asset.
Quantum of exemption
• If cost of new residential house ≥ Net sale consideration of original
asset, entire capital gains is exempt.
• If cost of new residential house < Net sale consideration of original
asset, only proportionate capital gains is exempt i.e.
Amount invested in new residential house
LTCG×
Net sale consideration
However, if the cost of new residential house/ amount invested in new
residential house exceeds ` 10 crore, the amount exceeding ` 10 crore
would not be taken into account for exemption.
Example
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Amount in
Net LTCG Cost of new column (3)
Consider- computed residential or ` 10 Exempt LTCG
ation house crores,
whichever
is lower
(1) ` 15 crore ` 7.5 crore ` 12 crore ` 10 crore ` 7.5 crore x 10/15
= ` 5 crore
(2) ` 20 crore ` 12 crore ` 15 crore ` 10 crore ` 12 crore x 10/20
= ` 6 crore
(3) ` 16 crore ` 12 crore ` 8 crore ` 8 crore ` 12 crore x 8/16 =
` 6 crore
(4) ` 10 crore ` 6 crore ` 10 crore ` 10 crore ` 6 crore x 10/10 =
` 6 crore
(5) ` 12 crore ` 6 crore ` 12 crore ` 10 crore ` 6 crore x 10/12 =
` 5 crore
Examples
1. If the net consideration is ` 9 crore, the capital gain is ` 4.50 crore and
the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto
31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, is ` 5 crore, then, as per
section 54F(4), the assessee can deposit the amount of ` 4 crore (i.e., ` 9
crore – ` 5 crore) not appropriated towards construction upto 31.7.2025/
31.10.2025, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming exemption u/s 54F.
If the assessee has deposited, say, ` 3 crore on or before 31.7.2025/
31.10.2025, as the case may be, the deemed cost of new residential house
would be ` 8 crore (` 5 crore + ` 3 crore). The exemption u/s 54F would
be ` 4 crore [i.e., ` 4.50 crore x ` 8 crore/` 9 crore].
2. If the net consideration is ` 15 crore, the capital gain is ` 7.50 crore and
the amount incurred for construction of new residential house upto
31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, is ` 6 crore, the assessee can
deposit ` 4 crore [i.e., ` 10 crore – ` 6 crore] on or before
31.7.2025/31.10.2025, as the case may be, in CGAS for claiming
exemption u/s 54F. If the assessee has deposited, say, ` 3 crore on or
before the due date of filing return u/s 139(1), the deemed cost of new
residential house would be ` 9 crore (` 6 crore + ` 3 crore). The
exemption u/s 54F would be ` 4.50 crore [i.e., ` 7.50 crore x ` 9 crore/
` 15 crore].
Consequences where the assessee purchases any other residential house
within a period of 2 years or constructs any other residential house within
a period of 3 years from the date of transfer of original asset:
The capital gains exempt earlier under section 54F shall be deemed to be
taxable as long-term capital gains in the previous year in which such
residential house is purchased or constructed.
Consequences if the new house is transferred within a period of 3 years
from the date of its purchase
• Capital gains would arise on transfer of the new house; and
• The capital gains exempt earlier under section 54F would be taxable as
long-term capital gains.
Note – In case the new residential house is sold after 2 years, the capital gains
would be long-term capital gains.
(vi) Capital Gains Account Scheme (CGAS)
Under sections 54, 54B, 54D and 54F, capital gains is exempt to the extent
of investment of such gains/ net consideration (in the case of section 54F) in
specified assets within the specified time. If such investment is not made
before the date of filing of return of income, then the capital gain or net
consideration (in case of exemption under section 54F) has to be deposited
under the CGAS. However, the capital gain in excess of ` 10 crore would not
be taken into account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54
and the net consideration in excess of ` 10 crore would not be taken into
account for the purpose of deposit in CGAS in case of section 54F.
Time limit
Such deposit in CGAS should be made before filing the return of income or
on or before the due date of filing the return of income, whichever is earlier.
In such cases, the amount already utilized for purchase or construction of
new asset plus the amount deposited under the CGAS on or before due
date u/s 139(1) would be deemed to be the cost of new asset. However, for
the purpose of sections 54 and 54F, the amount so deemed to be the cost
of the new asset cannot exceed ` 10 crore.
Proof of such deposit should be attached with the return. The deposit can
be withdrawn for utilization for the specified purposes in accordance with
the scheme.
Consequences if the amount deposited in CGAS is not utilized within
the stipulated time of 2 years / 3 years
If the amount deposited is not utilized for the specified purpose within the
stipulated period, then the unutilized amount shall be charged as capital
gain of the previous year in which the specified period expires. In the case
of section 54F, proportionate amount will be taxable.
CBDT Circular No.743 dated 6.5.96 clarifies that in the event of death of an
individual before the stipulated period, the unutilized amount is not
chargeable to tax in the hands of the legal heirs of the deceased individual.
Such unutilized amount is not income but is a part of the estate devolving
upon them.
(vii) Extension of time for acquiring new asset or depositing or investing
amount of Capital Gain [Section 54H]
In case of compulsory acquisition of the original asset, where the
compensation is not received on the date of transfer, the period available
for acquiring a new asset or making investment in CGAS under sections 54,
54B, 54D, 54EC and 54F would be considered from the date of receipt of
such compensation and not from the date of the transfer.
4.20 REFERENCE TO VALUATION OFFICER
[SECTION 55A]
Section 55A provides that the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of a
capital asset to a Valuation Officer in the following circumstances with a view to
ascertaining the fair market value of the capital asset for the purposes of capital
gains -
(i) In a case where the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee is in
accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer, if the Assessing
Officer is of the opinion that the value so claimed is at variance with its fair
market value.
Under this provision, the Assessing Officer can make a reference to the
Valuation Officer in cases where the fair market value is taken to be the sale
consideration of the asset. An Assessing Officer can also make a reference
to the Valuation Officer in a case where the fair market value of the asset as
on 01.04.2001 is taken as the cost of the asset, if he is of the view that there
is any variation between the value as on 01.04.2001 claimed by the assessee
in accordance with the estimate made by a registered valuer and the fair
market value of the asset on that date.
(ii) If the Assessing Officer is of the opinion that the fair market value of the
asset exceeds the value of the asset as claimed by the assessee by more
than 15% of the value of asset as claimed or by more than ` 25,000 of the
value of the asset as claimed by the assessee.
(iii) The Assessing Officer is of the opinion that, having regard to the nature of
asset and other relevant circumstances, it is necessary to make the
reference.
4.21 TAX ON SHORT TERM CAPITAL GAINS IN
RESPECT OF EQUITY SHARES/ UNITS OF AN
EQUITY ORIENTED FUND [SECTION 111A]
(i) Applicability of concessional rate of tax: This section provides for a
concessional rate of tax on the short-term capital gains on transfer of -
(1) an equity share in a company; or
(2) a unit of a business trust10; or
(3) a unit of an equity oriented fund
(ii) Concessional rate of tax in respect of STCG on transfer of certain assets:
The concessional rate of tax on the short-term capital in respect of transfer of
above-mentioned assets is as follow:
Date of transfer Rate of Tax
before 23.7.2024 15%
on or after 23.7.2024 20%
(iii) Conditions: The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate
are –
(1) the transaction of sale of such equity share or unit should be entered
into on or after 1.10.2004, being the date on which Chapter VII of the
Finance (No. 2) Act, 2004 came into force; and
(2) such transaction should be chargeable to securities transaction tax
under the said Chapter.
However, short-term capital gains arising from transactions undertaken in
foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located in an International
Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of
15% or 20%, as the case may be, even though STT is not leviable in respect
of such transaction.
(iii) Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit: In the case of
resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by
any other income, then, such short-term capital gain will be reduced by the
unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance would be taxed at
15% or 20%, as the case may be. However, the benefit of availing the basic
exemption limit is not available in the case of non-residents.
(iv) No deduction under Chapter VI-A against STCG taxable under section
111A: Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such
short-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity
10 Chapter XII-FA of the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the related provisions dealing with the
taxation aspects of business trust would be dealt with at the Final level.
oriented mutual fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income
of the assessee.
4.22 TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS
[SECTION 112]
(i) Concessional rate of tax: Where the total income of an assessee includes
long-term capital gains, tax is payable by the assessee at special rates on
such long-term capital gains. The treatment of long-term capital gains in
the hands of different types of assessees are as follows –
S. Long-term capital asset (LTCA) Rate of tax
No.
I. Where transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
(i) Unlisted securities, or shares of a Non-corporate non-resident/
closely held company foreign company - 10%
without the benefit of
indexation and foreign currency
fluctuation
Other Assessees – 20% with
indexation benefit
(ii) Listed securities (other than a - 10% without indexation or
unit) or a zero-coupon bond - 20% with indexation benefit
whichever is more beneficial to
the assessee
(iii) Other Assets (other than taxable - 20% with indexation benefit
u/s 112A)
II. Where transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
(i) Land or building or both if Individual or HUF, being a
acquired before 23.7.2024 resident – 12.5% without
indexation or 20% with
indexation benefit, whichever is
more beneficial to the assessee
Other Assessees – 12.5%
without indexation
(ii) - Land or building or both if 12.5% without indexation
acquired on or after 23.7.2024 [In case of non-residents, LTCG
or on transfer of unlisted
- Other Assets (other than taxable securities, or shares of a closely
u/s 112A) held company, would be
taxable @12.5% without
indexation and foreign currency
fluctuation]
Important Points to remember –
(1) For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income (excluding
long-term capital gains) is below the basic exemption limit, the
unadjusted basic exemption limit can be reduced from the long-term
capital gains. The remaining amount of long-term capital gains will be
taxed at 20% (with indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation),
depending on the date of transfer.
(2) Debentures or Bonds: In respect of debentures or bonds (whether
listed or unlisted) transferred or redeemed or matured before
23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be considered either long-
term or short-term, based on the holding period, and taxed
accordingly. If unlisted debentures or bonds are transferred or
redeemed or matured on or after 23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains
will always be treated as short-term, regardless of the holding period.
Indexation benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures,
even if transferred before 23.07.2024.
(3) Non-Residents and Foreign Companies: Long-term capital gains
from the transfer of listed shares (other than listed equity shares
covered u/s 112A) or debentures of an Indian company (acquired in
foreign currency) will be taxed as follows:
- 20% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation
adjustments) if the transfer takes place before 23.7.2024.
- 12.5% (without indexation, but with foreign currency fluctuation
adjustments) if the transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024.
(4) No Chapter VI-A deduction against LTCG: The provisions of section
112 make it clear that the deductions under Chapter VIA cannot be
availed in respect of the long-term capital gains included in the total
income of the assessee.
4.23 TAX ON LONG TERM CAPITAL GAINS
ON CERTAIN ASSETS [SECTION 112A]
(i) Applicability of concessional rate of tax: Section 112A provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in section 112, a concessional rate of
tax will be leviable on the long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 on
transfer of –
(a) an equity share in a company; or
(b) a unit of a business trust; or
(c) a unit of an equity oriented fund
(ii) Concessional rate of tax in respect of LTCG on transfer of certain assets:
The concessional rate of tax on the long-term capital in respect of transfer of
above-mentioned assets is as follows:
Date of transfer Rate of Tax
before 23.7.2024 10% on LTCG exceeding` 1,25,000
on or after 23.7.2024 12.5% on LTCG exceeding` 1,25,000
However, the total exemption on LTCG in a previous year cannot exceed
` 1,25,000.
(iii) Conditions: The conditions for availing the benefit of this concessional rate
are –
(a) In case of equity share in a company, STT has been paid on acquisition
and transfer of such capital asset
(b) In case of unit of an equity oriented fund or unit of business trust, STT
has been paid on transfer of such capital asset.
However, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify the nature of acquisition of equity share in a company on
which the condition of payment of STT on acquisition would not be
applicable.
Further, long-term capital gains arising from transaction undertaken on a
recognized stock exchange located in an International Financial Service
Centre (IFSC) would be taxable at a concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as
the case may be, where the consideration for transfer is received or
receivable in foreign currency, even though STT is not leviable in respect of
such transaction.
(iii) Adjustment of Unexhausted Basic Exemption Limit: In the case of
resident individuals or HUF, if the basic exemption is not fully exhausted by
any other income, then such long-term capital gain exceeding ` 1,25,000
will be reduced by the unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the
balance would be taxed at 10% or 12.5%, as the case may be.
However, the benefit of adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is
not available in the case of non-residents.
(iv) No deduction under Chapter VI-A against LTCG taxable under section
112A: Deductions under Chapter VI-A cannot be availed in respect of such
long-term capital gains on equity shares of a company or units of an equity
oriented mutual fund or unit of a business trust included in the total income
of the assessee.
(v) No benefit of rebate under section 87A against LTCG taxable under
section 112A: Rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax
payable @10% on LTCG under section 112A.
Subsequent to insertion of section 112A, the CBDT has issued clarification F. No.
370149/20/2018-TPL dated 04.02.2018 in the form of a Question and Answer
format to clarify certain issues raised in different for a on various issues relating
to the new tax regime for taxation of long-term capital gains. The relevant
questions raised and answers to such questions as per the said Circular are given
hereunder. [Answers to certain questions have been revised incorporating the
effect of amendments by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 2024]:
Q 1. What is the meaning of long term capital gains under the new tax
regime for long term capital gains?
Ans 1. Long term capital gains mean gains arising from the transfer of long-term
capital asset.
It provides for a new long-term capital gains tax regime for the following
assets–
i. Equity Shares in a company listed on a recognised stock exchange;
ii. Unit of an equity oriented fund; and
iii. Unit of a business trust.
The concessional tax rate u/s 112A applies to the above assets, if–
a. the assets mentioned in (i) and (ii) are held for a period of “more than
12 months” from the date of acquisition and the asset mentioned in
(iii) is held for a period of “more than 36 months” if transfer takes
place before 23.7.2024. However, the period of holding would be
“more than 12 months” if transfer of any of above assets take place on
or after 23.7.2024.; and
b. the Securities Transaction Tax (STT) is paid at the time of transfer.
However, in the case of equity shares acquired after 1.10.2004, STT is
required to be paid even at the time of acquisition (subject to notified
exemptions).
Q 2. What is the point of chargeability of the tax?
Ans 2. The tax will be levied only upon transfer of the long-term capital asset on
or after 1st April, 2018, as defined in clause (47) of section 2 of the Act.
Q 3. What is the method for calculation of long-term capital gains?
Ans 3. The long-term capital gains will be computed by deducting the cost of
acquisition from the full value of consideration on transfer of the long-term
capital asset.
Q 4. How do we determine the cost of acquisition for assets acquired on or
before 31st January, 2018?
Ans 4. The cost of acquisition for the long-term capital asset acquired on or
before 31st of January, 2018 will be the actual cost.
However, if the actual cost is less than the fair market value of such asset as
on 31st of January, 2018, the fair market value will be deemed to be the cost
of acquisition.
Further, if the full value of consideration on transfer is less than the fair
market value, then such full value of consideration or the actual cost,
whichever is higher, will be deemed to be the cost of acquisition.
Q 5. Please provide illustrations for computing long-term capital gains in
different scenarios, in the light of answers to questions 4.
Ans 5. The computation of long-term capital gains in different scenarios is
illustrated as under
Scenario 1 – An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its
fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of
April, 2024 at ` 250. As the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair
market value as on 31st of January, 2018, the fair market value of ` 200 will
be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long-term capital gain will be
` 50 (` 250 – ` 200).
Scenario 2 – An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its
fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of
April, 2024 at ` 150. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than
the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018. However, the sale value is
also less than the fair market value as on 31st of January, 2018. Accordingly,
the sale value of ` 150 will be taken as the cost of acquisition and the long-
term capital gain will be NIL (` 150 – ` 150).
Scenario 3 – An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its
fair market value is ` 50 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of
April, 2024 at ` 150. In this case, the fair market value as on 31st of January,
2018 is less than the actual cost of acquisition, and therefore, the actual cost
of ` 100 will be taken as actual cost of acquisition and the long-term capital
gain will be ` 50 (` 150 – ` 100).
Scenario 4 – An equity share is acquired on 1st of January, 2017 at ` 100, its
fair market value is ` 200 on 31st of January, 2018 and it is sold on 1st of April,
2024 at ` 50. In this case, the actual cost of acquisition is less than the fair
market value as on 31st January, 2018. The sale value is less than the fair market
value as on 31st of January, 2018 and also the actual cost of acquisition.
Therefore, the actual cost of ` 100 will be taken as the cost of acquisition in this
case. Hence, the long-term capital loss will be ` 50 (` 50 – ` 100) in this case.
Q 6. Whether the cost of acquisition will be inflation indexed?
Ans 6. Third proviso to section 48, provides that the long-term capital gain will be
computed without giving effect to the provisions of the second provisos of
section 48. Accordingly, it is clarified that the benefit of inflation indexation
of the cost of acquisition would not be available for computing long-term
capital gains.
Note – This is irrespective of whether the transfer takes place before or on or
after 23.7.2024.
Q 7. What will be the tax treatment of transfer made on or after 1st April 2018?
Ans 7. The long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 arising from transfer of
listed equity shares/ units of equity oriented fund/business trust on or after
1st April, 2018 will be taxed at 10% (where transfer is made before
23.7.2024) or 12.5% (where transfer is made on or after 23.7.2024) , as the
case may be. However, there will be no tax on gains accrued upto 31st
January, 2018.
Q8. What is the date from which the holding period will be counted?
Ans 8. The holding period will be counted from the date of acquisition.
Q9. Whether tax will be deducted at source in case of gains by resident tax
payer?
Ans 9. No. There will be no deduction of tax at source from the payment of long-
term capital gains to a resident tax payer.
Q10. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of bonus shares
acquired before 1st February 2018?
Ans 10. The cost of acquisition of bonus shares acquired before 31st January,
2018 will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac).Therefore, the fair market
value of the bonus shares as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of
acquisition (except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence,
the gains accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt11.
Q11. What will be the cost of acquisition in the case of right share acquired
before 1st February 2018?
Ans 11. The cost of acquisition of right share acquired before 31st January, 2018
will be determined as per section 55(2)(ac). Therefore, the fair market value
11Subject to the notification issued by the Central Government to specify the nature of acquisition of
equity share in a company on which the condition of payment of STT on acquisition would not be
applicable. This notification will be discussed at Final level.
of right share as on 31st January, 2018 will be taken as cost of acquisition
(except in some typical situations explained in Ans 5), and hence, the gains
accrued upto 31st January, 2018 will continue to be exempt13.
Q12. What will be the treatment of long-term capital loss arising from
transfer made on or after 1st April, 2018?
Ans 12. Long-term capital loss arising from transfer made on or after 1st April,
2018 will be allowed to be set-off and carried forward in accordance with
existing provisions of the Act. Therefore, it can be set-off against any other
long-term capital gains and unabsorbed loss can be carried forward to
subsequent eight years for set-off against long-term capital gains.
ILLUSTRATION 13
Calculate the income-tax liability for the assessment year 2025-26 in the following cases:
Mr. A Mrs. B Mr. C Mr. D
(age 45) (age 62) (age 81) (age 82)
Status Non-resident Non-resident Resident Non-
resident
Total income other 2,40,000 3,10,000 5,90,000 4,80,000
than long-term
capital gain
Long-term capital 85,000 10,000 60,000 Nil
gain [Assume from sale of from sale of listed from sale
transfer took place vacant site equity shares (STT of
before 23.7.2024] paid on sale and agricultural
purchase of land in
shares) rural area
(i) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D pay tax under default tax regime u/s 115BAC.
(ii) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D exercise the option to shift out of the default
tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the normal
provisions of the Act.
SOLUTION
(i) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D pay tax under default tax regime u/s
115BAC.
Computation of income-tax liability for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Mr. A Mrs. B Mr. C Mr. D
(age 45) (age 62) (age 81) (age 82)
Residential Status Non- Non-resident Resident Non-
resident resident
Applicable basic ` 3,00,000 ` 3,00,000 ` 3,00,000 ` 3,00,000
exemption limit
Asset sold Vacant site Listed equity Rural -
shares (STT agricultur
paid on both al land
sale and
purchase of
shares)
Long-term capital gain ` 85,000 ` 10,000 ` 60,000 -
(on sale of above asset) [Taxable [exempt u/s (Exempt –
@20% u/s 112A since it not a
112] is less than capital
` 1,25,000] asset)
Other income ` 2,40,000 ` 3,10,000 ` 5,90,000 ` 4,80,000
Tax liability
On LTCG ` 17,000 - - -
On Other income Nil ` 500 ` 14,500 ` 9,000
` 17,000 ` 500 ` 14,500 ` 9,000
Less: Rebate u/s 87A - - ` 14,500 -
` 17,000 ` 500 Nil ` 9,000
Add: Health & education ` 680 ` 20 Nil ` 360
cess (HEC) @4%
Total tax liability ` 17,680 ` 520 Nil ` 9,360
Note: Since Mr. C is a resident whose total income does not exceed ` 7 lakhs, he
is eligible for rebate of ` 25,000 or the actual tax payable, whichever is lower,
under section 87A.
(ii) If Mr. A, Mrs. B, Mr. C and Mr. D exercise the option to shift out of the
default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per
the normal provisions of the Act
Computation of income-tax liability for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Mr. A Mrs. B Mr. C Mr. D
(age 45) (age 62) (age 81) (age 82)
Residential Status Non- Non-resident Resident Non-
resident resident
Applicable basic ` 2,50,000 ` 2,50,000 ` 5,00,000 ` 2,50,000
exemption limit
Asset sold Vacant site Listed equity Rural -
shares (STT agricultural
paid on both land
sale and
purchase of
shares)
Long-term capital gain ` 85,000 ` 10,000 ` 60,000 -
(on sale of above asset) [Taxable [exempt u/s (Exempt –
@20% u/s 112A since it not a capital
112] is less than asset)
` 1,25,000]
Other income ` 2,40,000 ` 3,10,000 ` 5,90,000 ` 4,80,000
Tax liability
On LTCG ` 17,000 - - -
On Other income Nil ` 3,000 ` 18,000 ` 11,500
` 17,000 ` 3,000 ` 18,000 ` 11,500
Less: Rebate u/s 87A - - - -
` 17,000 ` 3,000 ` 18,000 ` 11,500
Add: Health & education ` 680 ` 120 ` 720 ` 460
cess (HEC) @4%
Total tax liability ` 17,680 ` 3,120 ` 18,720 ` 11,960
Notes:
Since Mrs. B and Mr. D are non-residents, they cannot avail the higher basic
exemption limit of ` 3,00,000 and ` 5,00,000 for persons over the age of 60 years
and 80 years, respectively. Also, they along with Mr. A, being non-residents are
not eligible for rebate under section 87A even though their total income does not
exceed ` 5 lakh.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Scope and year of chargeability [Section 45]
Any profits or gains arising from the transfer of a capital asset effected in the
previous year will be chargeable to tax under the head ‘Capital Gains’, and shall be
deemed to be the income of the previous year in which the transfer took place
[Section 45(1)]
Section Profits and gains P.Y. in which Deemed Full Value of
arising from the income is consideration for
following chargeable to computation of capital
transactions tax gains under section 48
chargeable as
income
45(1A) Money or other asset The previous year The value of money or the
received under an in which such fair market value of other
insurance from an money or other asset received.
insurer on account of asset is received.
damage/destruction
of any capital asset, as
a result of, flood,
hurricane, cyclone,
earthquake or other
convulsion of nature,
riot or civil
disturbance,
accidental fire or
explosion, action by
an enemy or action
taken in combating
an enemy
45(2) Transfer by way of The previous year The fair market value of
conversion by the in which such the capital asset on the
owner of a capital stock-in-trade is date of such conversion
asset into stock-in- sold or otherwise
trade of a business transferred by him
carried on by him.
45(5) Transfer by way of The previous year Compensation or
compulsory in which the consideration determined
acquisition under any consideration or or approved in the first
law, or a transfer, the part thereof is instance by the Central
consideration for first received. Government or RBI
which was
determined or
approved by the
Central Government
or RBI
If the compensation The previous year Amount by which the
or consideration is in which the compensation or
further enhanced amount was consideration is enhanced
by any court, received by the or further enhanced. For
Tribunal or other assessee. this purpose cost of
authority, the acquisition and cost of
enhanced amount improvement shall be
will be deemed to taken as ‘Nil’.
be the income
However, any
amount of
compensation
received in
pursuance of an
interim order of a
court, Tribunal or
other authority
shall be deemed to
be income
chargeable under
the head “Capital
Gains” of the
previous year in
which the final
order of such court,
Tribunal or other
authority is made.
Definitions [Section 2]
Section Term Definition
2(14) Capital Capital Asset means –
Asset (a) property of any kind held by an assessee, whether
or not connected with his business or profession;
(b) any securities held by a Foreign Institutional
Investor which has invested in such securities in
accordance with the regulations made under the
SEBI Act, 1992.
Exclusions from the definition of Capital Asset:
 Stock in trade [other than securities referred to in
(b) above], raw materials or consumables held for
the purposes of business or profession;
 Personal effects except jewellery, archeological
collections, drawings, paintings, sculptures or any
work of art;
 Rural agricultural land in India i.e. agricultural
land not situated within specified urban limits.
The agricultural land described in (a) and (b) below,
being land situated within the specified urban limits,
would fall within the definition of “capital asset”, and
transfer of such land would attract capital gains tax -
(a) agricultural land situated in any area within the
jurisdiction of a municipality or cantonment board
having population of not less than ten thousand, or
(b) agricultural land situated in any area within such
distance, measured aerially, in relation to the
range of population as shown hereunder -
Shortest aerial Population according to
distance from the the last preceding census
local limits of a of which the relevant
municipality or figures have been
cantonment board published before the
referred to in item (a) first day of the previous
year.
(i) ≤ 2 kms > 10,000
(ii) > 2 kms but ≤ 6 kms > 1,00,000
(iii) > 6 kms but ≤ 8 kms > 10,00,000
 Gold Deposits Bonds issued under the Gold
Deposit Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates
issued under the Gold Monetisation Scheme,
2015 and Gold Monetisation Scheme, 2018
notified by the Central Government;
 6½% Gold Bonds, 1977 or 7% Gold Bonds, 1980
or National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980, issued by
the Central Government;
 Special Bearer Bonds, 1991 issued by the Central
Government.
Note: ‘Property’ includes and shall be deemed to
have always included any rights in or in relation to an
Indian company, including rights of management or
control or any other rights whatsoever.
2(42A)/2 Short- Capital Asset STCG, if held LTCG, if
(29A) term for held for
capital In case transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
asset/ • Security (other than ≤ 12 months > 12
long-term unit) listed in a immediately months
capital recognized stock preceding immediately
asset exchange the date of preceding
• Unit of equity its transfer the date of
oriented fund/unit its transfer
of UTI
• Zero Coupon bond
• Unlisted shares ≤ 24 months > 24
• Land or building or immediately months
both preceding immediately
the date of preceding
its transfer the date of
its transfer
• Unlisted securities ≤ 36 months > 36
other than shares immediately months
• Other capital assets preceding immediately
the date of preceding
its transfer the date of
its transfer
In case transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
• Security listed in a ≤ 12 months > 12
recognized stock immediately months
exchange preceding immediately
the date of preceding
• Unit of equity- its transfer the date of
oriented fund/unit its transfer
of UTI
• Zero Coupon bond
• Other capital ≤ 24 months > 24
assets immediately months
preceding immediately
the date of preceding
its transfer the date of
its transfer
Note – As per section 50AA, capital gains arising from transfer of the
following assets would always be short-term capital irrespective of the
period of holding of such assets:
- units of a specified mutual fund acquired on or after 1.4.2023,
- market linked debentures,
- unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or
redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024.
Transactions not regarded as transfer [Section 47]: Some Examples
 Any distribution of capital assets on the total or partial partition of a HUF
 Any transfer of capital asset by an individual or HUF under a gift or will
or an irrevocable trust (by any person upto A.Y. 2024-25)
 Any transfer of capital asset by a holding company to its 100%
subsidiary Indian company or by a subsidiary company to its 100%
holding Indian company
 Any transfer or issue of shares by the resulting company, in a scheme
of demerger to the shareholders of the demerged company
 Any transfer by a shareholder in a scheme of amalgamation of shares
held by him in the amalgamating company
 Any transfer by an individual of sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI by
way of redemption
 Any transfer of a capital asset, being conversion of gold into Electronic
Gold Receipt issued by a Vault Manager, or conversion of Electronic
Gold Receipt into gold.
 Any transfer by way of conversion of bonds, debentures, debenture
stock, deposit certificates of a company, into shares or debentures of
that company.
 Any transfer by way of conversion of preference shares of a company
into equity shares of that company
 Any transfer of a capital asset in a transaction of reverse mortgage
under a scheme made and notified by the Central Government
Mode of computation of Capital Gains [Section 48]
Computation of long-term capital gains
Where transfer takes place before 23.7.2024
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer xx
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with
such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale) xx
Net Sale Consideration xx
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition and indexed cost of improvement xx
However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of
improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in
respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A
[i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]
Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xx
Long-term capital gains xx
Where transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of transfer xx
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection with
such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale) xx
Net Sale Consideration xx
Less: Cost of acquisition and Cost of improvement xx
However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of
improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed in
respect of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of Chapter VI-A
[i.e., under sections 80EE/ 80EEA]
Less: Exemption under sections 54/54B/54D/54EC/54F xx
Long-term capital gains xx
Notes:
(i) Deduction on account of securities transaction tax paid will not be allowed.
(ii) Indexed Cost of Acquisition =
CII for the year in which the asset is transferred
Cost of
× CII for the year in which the asset was first held by
acquisition
the assessee or 2001-02, whichever is later
(iii) Indexed Cost of Improvement =
CII for the year in which the asset is transferred
Cost of
× CII for the year in which the improvement took
improvement
place
(iv) As per section 48, benefit of indexation is available only on transfers of
long-term capital assets which takes place before 23.7.2024 other than
- on bonds or debentures (excluding capital indexed bonds issued by
the Government and sovereign gold bonds issued by RBI) or
- on shares or debentures of an Indian Co. acquired by a non-
resident in foreign currency.
However, a resident individual or a HUF is given an option to take the
benefit of indexation in respect of land or building acquired before
23.7.2024 and transferred on or after the said date, for the purposes of
computation of tax liability under section 112.
[Where land or building or both, being a long-term capital asset, acquired
before 23.7.2024, is transferred on or after 23.7.2024, the long-term capital
gain forming part of gross total income/total income has to be computed
without indexation benefit i.e., only cost of acquisition/cost of improvement
will be reduced from net consideration and not indexed cost of acquisition/
indexed cost of improvement. The benefit of indexation would be given
only while computing tax liability u/s 112, if tax @20% on LTCG computed
with indexation benefit is more beneficial to the resident individual/HUF
than tax @12.5% on LTCG computed without indexation benefit.
Computation of short-term capital gains
Full value of consideration received or accruing as a result of xxx
transfer
Less: Expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively in connection
with such transfer (e.g. brokerage on sale) xxx
(Note: Deduction on account of STT paid will not be allowed)
Net Sale Consideration xxx
Less: Cost of acquisition and cost of improvement xxx
However, the cost of acquisition of the asset or the cost of
improvement thereto would not include the deductions claimed
on account of interest u/s 24(b) or under the provisions of
Chapter VI-A [i.e., under the provisions of sections 80EE/80EEA]
Less: Exemption under sections 54B/54D xxx
Short-term capital gains xxx
Capital Gains: Special Provisions
Section Particulars
50 Any income from transfer of depreciable assets is deemed to be
capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital
assets, irrespective of the period of holding (i.e., indexation
benefit would not be available even if the period of holding of
such assets is more than 36 months).
50AA Any income from transfer of unit of a Specified Mutual Fund
acquired on or after 1.4.2023 or Market Linked Debenture or
unlisted bond and unlisted debenture which is transferred or
redeemed or matures on or after 23.7.2024 is deemed to be
capital gains arising from transfer of short-term capital assets.
50B Capital Gains on Slump Sale
Any profits and gains arising from slump sale effected in the previous
year shall be chargeable to income-tax as capital gains arising from
the transfer of capital assets and shall be deemed to be the income
of the previous year in which the transfer took place.
Where the undertaking being transferred under slump sale is held for
more than 36 months, the resultant gain is long-term; However, no
indexation benefit would be available. If the undertaking is held for
less than 36 months, the resultant gain is short-term.
Net worth is deemed to be the cost of acquisition and the cost
of improvement - ‘Net worth’ shall be aggregate value of total
assets minus value of liabilities of such undertaking as per books of
account.
Fair market value is deemed to be the full value of
consideration - Fair market value of the capital asset as on the date
of transfer, calculated in the prescribed manner, shall be deemed to
be the full value of the consideration received or accruing as a
result of the transfer of such capital asset.
Accordingly, the CBDT has prescribed that, for the purpose of
section 50B(2)(ii), the fair market value (FMV) of capital assets would
be the higher of –
(i) FMV 1, being the fair market value of capital assets
transferred by way of slump sale (determined on the date of
slump sale); and
(ii) FMV 2, being the fair market value of the consideration
(monetary and non-monetary) received or accruing as a result
of transfer by way of slump sale
Capital gains = Fair market value – Net Worth
Aggregate value of total assets would be the aggregate of the
following :
i) Written Down Value of depreciable assets;
ii) Nil, in case of self generated goodwill
iii) Nil, in case of capital assets in respect of which the whole of
the expenditure has been allowed or is allowable as
deduction under section 35AD; and
iv) Book value for other assets.
Revaluation of assets shall be ignored for computing Net Worth.
50C Computation of capital gains on sale of land or building or both
Sl. Condition Deemed Sale
No. Consideration
1. Stamp Duty Value > Actual
Consideration
If Stamp Duty Value > 110% of
Stamp Duty Value
actual consideration
If Stamp Duty Value ≤ 110% of
Actual sale consideration
actual sale consideration
2. Actual Consideration > Stamp Actual Sale Consideration
Duty Value
3. Value ascertained by Valuation Stamp Duty Value
Officer > Stamp Duty Value
4. Value ascertained by Valuation Value ascertained by
Officer < Stamp Duty Value Valuation Officer
Note – If the date of agreement is different from the date of
transfer, stamp duty value on the date of agreement can be
considered, if whole or part of the consideration is received by way
of account payee cheque/bank draft or ECS or prescribed
electronic modes (IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, Net banking, debit card,
credit card or BHIM Aadhar Pay) on or before the date of
agreement. Otherwise, stamp duty value on the date of transfer has
to be considered.
50CA Fair Market Value deemed to be full value of consideration in
case of transfer of unlisted shares in certain cases
If consideration received or accruing as a FMV of such share
result of transfer of unquoted share < determined in the
FMV of such share determined in the prescribed manner
prescribed manner would be deemed as
The provisions of this section would the full value of
not, however, be applicable to any consideration
consideration received or accruing as
a result of transfer by such class of
persons and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
50D Fair Market Value deemed to be full value of consideration in
certain cases
Where the consideration received or FMV of the said asset
accruing as a result of the transfer of on the date of transfer
a capital asset by an assessee is not would be deemed as
ascertainable or cannot be the full value of
determined consideration
51 Advance money received and forfeited upto 31.3.2014
Where the assessee has received advance money on an earlier
occasion for transfer of capital asset, but the transfer could not
be effected due to failure of negotiations, then, the advance
money forfeited by the assessee has to be reduced from the cost
of acquisition (and indexation would be calculated on the cost so
reduced) while computing capital gains, when the capital asset is
transferred or sold.
Advance money received and forfeited on or after 1.4.2014
Such advance money received on or after 1.4.2014 would be
taxable under section 56(2) under the head “Income from other
sources”. Therefore, advance money received and forfeited on or
after 1.4.2014 should not be deducted from the cost for
determining the indexed cost of acquisition while computing
capital gains arising on transfer of the asset.
111A Tax on short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares
and units of equity oriented fund on which STT is chargeable
 Any short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares or
units of an equity oriented fund on which securities
transaction tax has been paid on such sale shall be liable to
tax @15% if transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 and
@ 20% if transfer takes place on or after 23.7.2024.
 In case of resident individuals and HUF, the short-term
capital gain shall be reduced by the unexhausted basic
exemption limit and the balance shall be taxed at 15%/20%,
as the case may be, depending on the date of transfer.
 No deduction under Chapter VI-A can be claimed in
respect of such short-term capital gain.
 Short-term capital gains arising from transaction undertaken
in foreign currency on a recognized stock exchange located
in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be
taxable at a concessional rate of 15%/20%, as the case may
be, even when STT is not paid in respect of such transaction.
112 Long-term capital asset Rate of tax
(LTCA)
In case of transfer took place before 23.7.2024
Unlisted securities, or shares of Non-corporate non-resident/
a closely held company foreign company - 10%
without the benefit of
indexation and currency
fluctuation
Other Assessees – 20% with
indexation benefit12
12 In case of transfer of bonds and debentures, whether listed or unlisted, indexation benefit
would not be available.
Listed securities (other than a - 10% without indexation or
unit) or a zero-coupon bond
- 20% with indexation benefit
whichever is more beneficial to
the assessee
Other Assets - 20% with indexation benefit
In case of transfer took place on or after 23.7.2024
Land or building or both if Individual or HUF, – 12.5%
acquired before 23.7.2024 without indexation or 20% with
indexation benefit, whichever is
more beneficial to the assessee
Other Assessees – 12.5%
without indexation
- Land or building or both if 12.5% without indexation
acquired on or after 23.7.2024
or
- Other Assets
 For Individuals or HUF (Residents): If their total income
(excluding long-term capital gains) is below the basic
exemption limit, the unadjusted basic exemption limit can
be reduced from the long-term capital gains. The remaining
amount of long-term capital gains will be taxed at 20% (with
indexation) or 12.5% (without indexation), depending on the
date of transfer.
 Debentures or Bonds: In respect of debentures or bonds
(whether listed or unlisted) transferred or redeemed or
matured before 23.7.2024, the resultant capital gains will be
considered either long-term or short-term, based on the
holding period, and taxed accordingly. If unlisted debentures
or bonds are transferred or redeemed or matured on or after
23.7.2024, the resulting capital gains will always be treated as
short-term, regardless of the holding period. Indexation
benefit is in any case not available for bonds/debentures, even
if transferred before 23.07.2024.
 Non-Residents and Foreign Companies: Long-term capital
gains from the transfer of listed shares or debentures of an
Indian company (acquired in foreign currency) will be taxed
as follows:
- 20% (without indexation, but with foreign currency
fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer occurs
before 23.7.2024.
- 12.5% (without indexation, but with foreign
currency fluctuation adjustments) if the transfer
occurs on or after 23.7.2024.
 No Chapter VI-A deduction against LTCG: The provisions
of section 112 make it clear that the deductions under
Chapter VIA cannot be availed in respect of the long-term
capital gains included in the total income of the assessee.
112A Tax on long-term capital gains on certain assets
 Any long-term capital gains exceeding ` 1,25,000 on
transfer of equity shares or units of an equity oriented fund
shall be liable to tax @10% on such capital gain where the
transfer takes place before 23.7.2024 and @12.5% on
capital gains where transfer takes place on or after
23.7.2024, if securities transaction tax has been paid on
acquisition and such sale in case of equity share, and on
such sale in case of units of an equity oriented mutual fund.
 In case of resident individuals and HUF, the long-term
capital gain shall be reduced by the unexhausted basic
exemption limit and the balance shall be taxed at 10%
or 12.5%, as the case may be.
 No deduction under Chapter VI-A or rebate under section
87A can be claimed in respect of such long-term capital gain.
Long-term capital gains (in excess of ` 1,25,000) arising from
transaction undertaken on a recognized stock exchange located
in an International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) would be
taxable at a concessional rate of 10% or 12.5%, as the case may
be, where the consideration for transfer is received or receivable in
foreign currency, even when STT is not paid in respect of such
transaction.
Cost of Acquisition [Section 55]
Sl. Nature of asset Cost of acquisition
No.
1 Goodwill of business or profession,
trademark, brand name or any other
intangible asset etc.,
- Self generated Nil
- Acquired from previous owner Purchase price
However, in case of capital asset, Purchase price as reduced by
being goodwill of a business or the total amount of
profession, in respect of which depreciation obtained by the
depreciation u/s 32(1) has been assessee under section 32(1).
obtained by the assessee in any
P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)
- became the property of the Purchase price for such
assessee by way of distribution of previous owner
assets on total or partial partition
of HUF, under a gift or will by an
individual or HUF (by any person
upto 31.3.2024, by succession,
inheritance, distribution of assets
on liquidation of a company, etc.
and previous owner has acquired
it by purchase
However, in case of capital asset, Purchase price as reduced by
being goodwill of a business or the total amount of
profession which was acquired by depreciation obtained by the
the previous owner by purchase assessee under section 32(1).
and in respect of which
depreciation u/s 32(1) has been
obtained by the assessee in any
P.Y. (upto P.Y.2019-20)
The cost of improvement of such
assets would be Nil.
2. Bonus shares
If bonus shares are allotted before FMV on 1.4.2001
1.4.2001
If bonus shares are allotted on or Nil
after 1.4.2001
Bonus shares allotted before 1.2.2018, The higher of –
on which STT has been paid at the (i) Actual cost of acquisition
time of transfer (i.e., Nil, in case of bonus
shares allotted on or after
1.4.2001; and
FMV on 1.4.2001, in case
of bonus shares allotted
before 1.4.2001)
(ii) Lower of –
(a) FMV as on 31.1.2018;
and
(b) Actual sale
consideration
3. Rights Shares
Original shares (which forms the basis Amount actually paid for
of entitlement of rights shares) acquiring the original shares
Rights shares subscribed for by the Amount actually paid for
assessee acquiring the rights shares
Rights entitlement (which is Nil
renounced by the assessee in favour
of a person)
Rights shares which are purchased by Purchase price paid to the
the person in whose favour the renouncer of rights entitlement as
assessee has renounced the rights well as the amount paid to the Co.
entitlement which has allotted the rights shares.
4. Long term capital assets being, Cost of acquisition shall be the
- equity shares in a company on higher of -
which STT is paid both at the (i) cost of acquisition of such
time of purchase and transfer or asset; and
- unit of equity oriented fund on (ii) lower of
which STT is paid at the time of - the FMV of such asset
transfer. on 31.1.2018; and
acquired before 1st February, 2018 - the full value of
consideration recd or
accruing as a result of
the transfer of the
capital asset.
5. Any other capital asset Cost of the asset to the
Where such capital asset became the assessee, or FMV as on
property of the assessee before 1.4.2001, at the option of the
1.4.2001 assessee. However, in case of
capital asset being land or
building, FMV as on 1.4.2001
shall not exceed stamp duty
value as on 1.4.2001.
Where capital assets became the Cost to the previous owner or
property of the assessee by way of FMV as on 1.4.2001, at the option
distribution of assets on total or of the assessee. However, in case
partial partition of HUF, under a gift or of capital asset being land or
will, by succession, inheritance by an building, FMV as on 1.4.2001
individual or HUF (by any person upto shall not exceed stamp duty
31.3.2024), distribution of assets on value as on 1.4.2001.
liquidation of a company, etc. and the
capital asset became the property of
the previous owner before 1.4.2001.
The provisions contained in (5) above shall also apply to the assets
mentioned in (3) and (4) above.
Cost of the property in the hands of The FMV on the date on which
previous owner cannot be the capital asset become the
ascertained property of the previous
owner would be considered as
cost of acquisition.
Cost of improvement of certain assets [Section 55]
Sl. Nature of asset Cost of improvement
No.
1 Goodwill or any other Nil
intangible asset of a business,
right to manufacture, produce
or process any article or thing,
right to carry on any business
or profession or any other
right.
2 Where the capital asset All expenditure of a capital nature
became the property of the incurred in making any addition or
previous owner or the alteration to the capital asset on or
assessee before 1-4-2001 after 1.4.2001 by the previous owner or
the assessee.
3 In relation to any other capital All capital expenditure incurred in
asset making additions or alterations to the
capital asset on or after 1.4.2001 –
- by the assessee after it became his
property; and
- by the previous owner [in a case
where the assessee acquired the
property by modes specified in
section 49(1)].
Capital Gains: Exemptions under section 10
Section Particulars
10(37) Where any individual or HUF owns urban agricultural land which
has been used for agricultural purposes for a period of two
years immediately preceding the date of transfer by such
individual or a parent of his or by such HUF and the same is
compulsorily acquired under any law or the consideration for such
transfer is determined or approved by the Central Government or
the RBI, resultant capital gain will be exempt provided the
compensation or consideration for such transfer is received on or
after 1.4.2004.
10(43) The amount received by the senior citizen as a loan, either in
lump sum or in installments, in a transaction of reverse mortgage
would be exempt from income-tax.
]F45
ot
snoitceS[
sniaG
latipaC
fo
noitpmexE
F45
noitceS
CE45
noitceS
D45
noitceS
B45
noitceS
noitceS
sralucitraP
.S
.oN
FUH
/laudividnI
eessessa
ynA
eessessa
ynA
/laudividnI
FUH
/laudividnI
elbigilE
FUH
eessessA
rehto
ACTL
ynA
gnidliub
ro
dnaL
&
dnaL
nabrU
esuoH
laitnediseR
tessA
laitnediseR
naht
)ACTL(
htob
ro
gnidliub
larutlucirgA
)ACTL(
derrefsnart
.esuoH
fo
trap
gnimrof
dnaL
lairtsudni
na
gnikatrednu
ton
dluohs
eessessA
-
gnidliub
&
dnaL
dluohs
dnaL
hcus
morf
emocnI
rehtO
eno
naht
erom
nwo
desu
neeb
evah
rof
desu
eb
eb
dluohs
esuoh
snoitidnoC
fo
ssenisub
rof
no
esuoh
laitnediser
larutlucirga
rednu
elbaegrahc
rof
gnikatrednu
.refsnart
fo
etad
eht
yb
sesoprup
emocnI“
daeh
eht
sraey
tsael
ta
ton
dluohs
eH
sih
ro eessessa
esuoh
morf
yletaidemmi
nihtiw
esahcrup
ro
stnerap
”ytreporp
eht
gnidecerp
tcurtsnoc
ro
sraey
rof
FUH
.refsnart
fo
etad
retfa
sraey
nihtiw
sraey
refsnart
ehT
,refsnart
fo
etad
eht
yletaidemmi
yaw
yb
eb
dluohs
laitnediser
rehtona
yroslupmoc
fo
eht
gnidecerp
.esuoh
eht
fo
noitisiuqca
fo
etad
lairtsudni
refsnart
gnikatrednu
laitnediseR
enO
ro
IAHN
fo
sdnoB
ro
dnaL
gnieb
rof
dnaL
laitnediseR
enO
gniyfilauQ
ni
detautis
esuoH
rehto
yna
ro
LCER
ro
gnidliuB
rof
desu
ni
detautis
esuoH
,.e.i
tessa
3.468 INCOME TAX LAW
yb
deifiton
dnob
ro
dnal
ni
thgir
larutlucirga
owT/aidnI
ni
tessa
elbameedeR(
.G.C
gnidliub
esoprup
sesuoh
laitnediser
hcihw
)sraey
retfa
)laruR
/nabrU(
eht
ta
,aidnI
ni
sniag
latipac
eht
fo
noitpo
eb
ot
sah
erehw
,eessessa
detsevni
seod
sniag
latipac
deecxe
ton
erorc
`
nihtiw
esahcruP
a
nihtiw
esahcruP
/esahcruP
esahcruP
nihtiw
esahcruP
timil
emiT
2
ro
erofeb
raey
fo
doirep
tcurtsnoc
a
nihtiw
ro
erofeb
raey
rof
etad
eht
retfa
sraey
eht
retfa
shtnom
sraey
nihtiw
fo
doirep
etad
eht
retfa
sraey
/esahcrup
refsnart
fo
refsnart
fo
etad
etad
eht
retfa
eht
retfa
sraey
refsnart
fo
noitcurtsnoc
)ro(
rof
,refsnart
fo
fo
etad
)ro(
nihtiw
tcurtsnoC
-er
ro
gnitfihs
refsnart
nihtiw
tcurtsnoc
etad
eht
retfa
sraey
gnihsilbatse
etad
eht
retfa
sraey
refsnart
fo
gnitsixe
eht
refsnart
fo
ro
gnikatrednu
a
pu
gnittes
lairtsudni
wen
.gnikatrednu
wen
fo
tsoC
ro
niaG
latipaC
wen
fo
tsoC
wen
fo
tsoC
wen
fo
tsoC
fo
tnuomA
≥
esuoH
laitnediseR
ni
detsevni
tnuoma
latipaC
ro
tessa
larutlucirgA
esuoH
laitnediseR
noitpmexE
elas
teN
,sdnob
deificeps
,niaG
latipaC
ro
dnaL
sa
,sesuoh
owt
ro
fo
noitaredisnoc
.rewol
si
revehcihw
si
revehcihw
,niaG
ro
eb
yam
esac
eht
mumixaM
eritne
,tessa
lanigiro
.rewol
si
revehcihw
,niaG
latipaC
elbissimrep
si
niag
latipaC
si
,rewol
,rewol
si
revehcihw
fo
tuo
tnemtsevni
.tpmexe
tpmexe
.tpmexe
si
gnisira
sniag
latipac
CAPITAL GAINS 3.469
fo
tsoC
raey
laicnanif
yna
ni
eht
fi
,revewoH
<
esuoH
laitnediseR
,shkal
`
si
wen
fo
tsoc
hcus
rehtehw
elas
teN
esuoh
laitnediser
fo
noitaredisnoc
edam
si
tnemtsevni
`
sdeecxe
ro
YF
tnerruc
eht
ni
,tessa
lanigiro
tnuoma
eht
,erorc
ro
YF
tneuqesbus
etanoitroporp
`
gnideecxe
.htob
si
niag
latipac
ton
dluow
erorc
.tpmexe
otni
nekat
eb
eht
fi
,revewoH
rof
tnuocca
wen
fo
tsoc
ehT
.noitpmexe
esuoh
laitnediser
mumixam
,erorc
`
sdeecxe
taht
noitpmexe
tnuoma
eht
yb
demialc
eb
nac
`
gnideecxe
si
eessessa
eht
eb
ton
dluow
erorc
.erorc
`
tnuocca
otni
nekat
.noitpmexe
rof
3.470 INCOME TAX LAW
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Mithun purchased 100 equity shares of M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. on 01-
04-2007 at rate of ` 1,000 per share in public issue of the company by
paying securities transaction tax.
Company allotted bonus shares in the ratio of 1:1 on 01.12.2023. He has also
received dividend of ` 10 per share on 01.05.2024.
He has sold all the shares on 01.10.2024 at the rate of ` 4,000 per share
through a recognized stock exchange and paid brokerage of 1% and
securities transaction tax of 0.02%.
Compute his total income and tax liability for A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. Mithun
pays tax under default tax regime, assuming that he is having other income
of ` 8,00,000. Fair market value of shares of M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. on
31.1.2018 is ` 2,000.
2. Aarav converts his plot of land purchased in July, 2004 for ` 80,000 into
stock-in-trade on 31st March, 2024. The fair market value as on 31.3.2024 was
` 3,00,000. The stock-in-trade was sold for ` 3,25,000 in the month of
January, 2025.
Find out the taxable income, if any, and if so under which head of income and
for which Assessment Year?
Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2004-05:113; F.Y. 2023-24: 348; F.Y. 2024-25: 363.
3. Mrs. Harshita purchased a land at a cost of ` 35 lakhs in the F.Y. 2004-05 and
held the same as her capital asset till 20th March, 2024.
She started her real estate business on 21st March, 2024 and converted the said
land into stock-in-trade of her business on the said date, when the fair market
value of the land was ` 210 lakhs.
She constructed 15 flats of equal size, quality and dimension. Cost of
construction of each flat is ` 10 lakhs. Construction was completed in February,
2025. She sold 10 flats at ` 30 lakhs per flat in March, 2025. The remaining 5
flats were held in stock as on 31st March, 2025.
She invested ` 50 lakhs in bonds issued by National Highways Authority of
India on 31st March, 2025 and another ` 50 lakhs in bonds of Rural
Electrification Corporation Ltd. in April, 2025.
Compute the amount of chargeable capital gain and business income in the
hands of Mrs. Harshita arising from the above transactions for
A.Y. 2025-26 indicating clearly the reasons for treatment for each item.
[Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2004-05: 113; F.Y. 2023-24: 348; F.Y. 2024-25: 363].
4. Mr. A is an individual carrying on business. His stock and machinery were
damaged and destroyed in a fire accident which occurred in December 2024.
The value of stock lost (total damaged) was ` 6,50,000. Certain portion of the
machinery could be salvaged. The opening balance of the block as on
1.4.2024 (i.e., WDV as on 31.3.2024 after providing depreciation for
P.Y. 2023-24) was ` 10,80,000.
During the process of safeguarding machinery and in the fire fighting
operations, Mr. A lost his gold chain and a diamond ring, which he had
purchased in April, 2005 for ` 1,20,000. The market value of these two items
as on the date of fire accident was ` 1,80,000.
Mr. A received the following amounts from the insurance company:
(i) Towards loss of stock ` 4,80,000
(ii) Towards damage of machinery ` 6,00,000
(iii) Towards gold chain and diamond ring ` 1,80,000
You are requested to briefly comment on the tax treatment of the above three
items under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
5. Mr. Sarthak entered into an agreement with Mr. Jaikumar to sell his
residential house located at Kanpur on 16.08.2024 for ` 1,50,00,000.
The sale proceeds were to be paid in the following manner:
(i) 20% through account payee bank draft on the date of agreement.
(ii) 60% on the date of the possession of the property.
(iii) Balance after the completion of the registration of the title to the
property.
Mr. Jaikumar was handed over the possession of the property on 15.12.2024
and the registration process was completed on 14.01.2025. He paid the sale
proceeds as per the sale agreement.
The value determined by the Stamp Duty Authority-
(a) on 16.08.2024 was ` 1,70,00,000;
(b) on 15.12.2024 was ` 1,71,00,000; and
(c) on 14.01.2025 was ` 1,71,50,000.
Mr. Sarthak had acquired the residential house at Kanpur on 01.04.2001 for
` 30,00,000. After recovering the sale proceeds from Jaikumar, he purchased
two residential house properties, one in Kanpur for ` 20,00,000 on 24.3.2025
and another in Delhi for ` 35,00,000 on 28.5.2025.
Compute the income chargeable under the head "Capital Gains" of
Mr. Sarthak for the Assessment Year 2025-26.
Cost Inflation Index for Financial Year(s): 2001-02 - 100; 2024-25 - 363
6. Mrs. Yuvika bought a vacant land for ` 80 lakhs in May 2005. Registration
and other expenses were 10% of the cost of land. She constructed a residential
building on the said land for ` 100 lakhs during the financial year 2007-08.
She entered into an agreement for sale of the above said residential house
with Mr. Johar (not a relative) in April 2015. The sale consideration was fixed
at ` 700 lakhs and on 23-4-2015, Mrs. Yuvika received ` 20 lakhs as advance
in cash by executing an agreement. However, due to failure on part of
Mr. Johar, the said negotiation could not materialise and hence, the said
amount of advance was forfeited by Mrs. Yuvika.
Mrs. Yuvika, again entered into an agreement on 01.05.2024 for sale of this
house at ` 810 lakhs. She received ` 80 lakhs as advance by RTGS. The stamp
duty value on the date of agreement was ` 890 lakhs. The sale deed was
executed and registered on 14-07-2024 for the agreed consideration.
However, the State stamp valuation authority had revised the values, hence,
the value of property for stamp duty purposes was ` 900 lakhs. Mrs. Yuvika
paid 1% as brokerage on sale consideration received.
Subsequent to sale, Mrs. Yuvika made following acquisition/investments:
(i) Acquired two residential houses at Delhi and Chandigarh for ` 130
lakhs and ` 50 lakhs, respectively, on 31.1.2025 and 15.5.2025
(ii) Acquired a residential house at UK for ` 180 lakhs on 23.3.2025.
(iii) Subscribed to NHAI capital gains bond (approved under section 54EC)
for ` 50 lakhs on 30-11-2024 and for ` 40 lakhs on 9-1-2025.
Compute the income chargeable under the head 'Capital Gains' of
Mrs. Yuvika for A.Y.2025-26. The choice of exemption must be in the manner
most beneficial to the assessee.
Cost Inflation Index: F.Y. 2005-06 – 117; F.Y. 2007-08 – 129; F.Y. 2024-25 - 363.
7. Mr. Shiva purchased a house property on February 15, 1979 for ` 3,24,000. In
addition, he has also paid stamp duty @10% on the stamp duty value of
` 3,50,000.
In April, 2008, Mr. Shiva entered into an agreement with Mr. Mohan for sale
of such property for ` 14,35,000 and received an amount of ` 1,11,000 as
advance. However, the sale consideration did not materialize and Mr. Shiva
forfeited the advance. In May 2015, he again entered into an agreement for
sale of said house for ` 20,25,000 to Ms. Deepshikha and received ` 1,51,000
as advance. However, as Ms. Deepshikha did not pay the balance amount,
Mr. Shiva forfeited the advance. In August, 2015, Mr. Shiva constructed the
first floor by incurring a cost of ` 3,90,000.
On November 15, 2024, Mr. Shiva entered into an agreement with
Mr. Manish for sale of such house for ` 30,50,000 and received an amount of
` 1,50,000 as advance through an account payee cheque. Mr. Manish paid the
balance entire sum and Mr. Shiva transferred the house to Mr. Manish on
February 20, 2025. Mr. Shiva has paid the brokerage @1% of sale
consideration to the broker.
On April 1, 2001, fair market value of the house property was ` 11,85,000 and
Stamp duty value was ` 10,70,000. Further, the Valuation as per Stamp duty
Authority of such house on 15th November, 2024 was ` 39,00,000 and on
20th February, 2025 was ` 41,00,000.
Compute the capital gains in the hands of Mr. Shiva for A.Y.2025-26. Also,
compute the tax liability under section 112, assuming that the basic
exemption limit has been fully exhausted against other income.
CII for F.Y. 2001-02: 100; F.Y. 2008-09: 137; F.Y. 2015-16: 254; F.Y. 2024-25: 363
ANSWERS
1. Computation of total income & tax liability of Mr. Mithun for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Long term capital gains on sale of original shares
Gross sale consideration (100 x ` 4,000) 4,00,000
Less: Brokerage@1% 4,000
Net sale consideration 3,96,000
Less: Cost of acquisition (100 x ` 2,000) (Refer Note 1) 2,00,000
Long term capital gains 1,96,000
Short term capital gains on sale of bonus shares
Gross sale consideration (100 x ` 4,000) 4,00,000
Less: Brokerage@1% 4,000
Net sale consideration 3,96,000
Less: Cost of acquisition of bonus shares [Nil as such NIL
shares are allotted after 1.04.2001]
Short term capital gains [Since bonus shares are held for 3,96,000
less than 12 months before sale]
Income from other sources
Dividend received from M/s Goodmoney Co. Ltd. is 2,000
taxable in the hands of shareholders [200 shares x 10 per
share]
Other income 8,00,000
Total Income 13,94,000
Tax Liability
Tax on STCG u/s 11A
20% of ` 3,96,000 79,200
Tax on LTCG u/s 112A
12.5% of (` 1,96,000 - ` 1,25,000) since it is transferred on 8,875
or after 23.7.2024
Tax on other income of ` 8,02,000
` 3,00,000 to ` 7,00,000@5% 20,000
` 7,00,000 to ` 8,02,000 @10% 10,200 30,200
1,18,275
Add: Health and education cess @4% 4,731
Tax liability 1,23,006
Tax liability (rounded off) 1,23,010
Notes:
(1) Cost of acquisition of such equity shares acquired before 1.2.2018 is higher
of
- Cost of acquisition i.e., ` 1,000 per share and
- lower of
Fair market value of such asset i.e., ` 2,000 per share and
Full value of consideration i.e., ` 4,000 per share.
Therefore, the cost of acquisition of original share is ` 2,000 per share.
(2) Securities transaction tax is not allowable as deduction.
2. Conversion of a capital asset into stock-in-trade is a transfer within the
meaning of section 2(47) in the previous year in which the asset is so
converted. However, the capital gains will be charged to tax only in the year
in which the stock-in-trade is sold.
The cost inflation index of the financial year in which the conversion took
place should be considered for computing indexed cost of acquisition.
Further, the fair market value on the date of conversion would be deemed
to be the full value of consideration for transfer of the asset as per section
45(2). The sale price less the fair market value on the date of conversion
would be treated as the business income of the year in which the stock-in-
trade is sold.
Therefore, in this problem, both capital gains and business income would be
charged to tax in the A.Y. 2025-26.
Particulars
`
Profits & Gains of Business or Profession
Sale price of stock-in-trade 3,25,000
Less: Fair market value on the date of conversion 3,00,000
Capital Gains 25,000
Full value of consideration (Fair market value on the 3,00,000
date of conversion)
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition (` 80,000 × 2,46,372
348/113)
Long-term capital gain 53,628
Taxable Income 78,628
3. Computation of capital gains and business income of
Harshita for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Business Income
Sale price of flats [10 × ` 30 lakhs] 3,00,00,000
Less: Cost of flats
Fair market value of land on the date of conversion 1,40,00,000
[` 210 lacs × 2/3]
Cost of construction of flats [10 × ` 10 lakhs] 1,00,00,000
Business income chargeable to tax for A.Y.2025-26 60,00,000
Capital Gains
Fair market value of land on the date of conversion deemed as 2,10,00,000
the full value of consideration for the purposes of section 45(2)
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition [` 35,00,000 × 348/113] 1,07,78,761
1,02,21,239
Proportionate capital gains arising during A.Y. 2025-26 68,14,159
[` 1,02,21,239 x 2/3]
Less: Exemption under section 54EC 50,00,000
Capital gains chargeable to tax for A.Y.2025-26 18,14,159
Notes:
(1) The conversion of a capital asset into stock-in-trade is treated as a
transfer under section 2(47). It would be treated as a transfer in the
year in which the capital asset is converted into stock-in-trade (i.e.,
P.Y.2023-24, in this case).
(2) As per section 45(2), the capital gains arising from the transfer by way
of conversion of capital assets into stock-in-trade will be chargeable
to tax only in the year in which the stock-in-trade is sold.
(3) The indexation benefit for computing indexed cost of acquisition
would, however, be available only up to the year of conversion of
capital asset into stock-in-trade (i.e., P.Y.2023-24) and not up to the
year of sale of stock-in-trade (i.e., P.Y.2024-25).
(4) For the purpose of computing capital gains in such cases, the fair
market value of the capital asset on the date on which it was
converted into stock-in-trade shall be deemed to be the full value of
consideration received or accruing as a result of the transfer of the
capital asset.
In this case, since only 2/3rd of the stock-in-trade (10 flats out of 15
flats) is sold in the P.Y.2024-25, only proportionate capital gains (i.e.,
2/3rd) would be chargeable to tax in the A.Y.2025-26.
(5) On sale of such stock-in-trade, business income would arise. The
business income chargeable to tax would be the difference between
the price at which the stock-in-trade is sold and the fair market value
on the date of conversion of the capital asset into stock-in-trade.
(6) In case of conversion of capital asset into stock-in-trade and
subsequent sale of stock-in-trade, the period of 6 months is to be
reckoned from the date of sale of stock-in-trade for the purpose of
exemption under section 54EC [CBDT Circular No.791 dated 2.6.2000].
In this case, since the investment in bonds of NHAI has been made
within 6 months of sale of flats, the same qualifies for exemption under
section 54EC. With respect to long-term capital gains arising on land or
building or both in any financial year, the maximum deduction under
section 54EC would be ` 50 lakhs, whether the investment in bonds of
NHAI or RECL are made in the same financial year or next financial year
or partly in the same financial year and partly in the next financial year.
Therefore, even though investment of ` 50 lakhs has been made in bonds
of NHAI during the P.Y. 2024-25 and investment of ` 50 lakhs has been
made in bonds of RECL during the P.Y. 2025-26, both within the stipulated
six month period, the maximum deduction allowable for A.Y. 2025-26, in
respect of long-term capital gain arising on sale of long-term capital
asset(s) during the P.Y. 2024-25, is only ` 50 lakhs.
4. (i) Compensation towards loss of stock: Any compensation received
from the insurance company towards loss/damage to stock in trade is
to be construed as a trading receipt. Hence, ` 4,80,000 received as
insurance claim for loss of stock has to be assessed under the head
“Profit and gains of business or profession”.
Note - The assessee can claim the value of stock destroyed by fire as
revenue loss, eligible for deduction while computing income under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(ii) Compensation towards damage to machinery: The question does
not mention whether the salvaged machinery is taken over by the
Insurance company or whether there was any replacement of
machinery during the year. Assuming that the salvaged machinery is
taken over by the Insurance company, and there was no fresh addition
of machinery during the year, the block of machinery will cease to
exist. Therefore, ` 4,80,000 being the excess of written down value (i.e.
` 10,80,000) over the insurance compensation (i.e. ` 6,00,000) will be
assessable as a short-term capital loss.
Note – If new machinery is purchased in the next year, it will
constitute the new block of machinery, on which depreciation can be
claimed for that year.
(iii) Compensation towards loss of gold chain and diamond ring: Gold
chain and diamond ring are capital assets as envisaged by section
2(14). They are not “personal effects”, which alone are to be excluded.
If any profit or gain arises in a previous year owing to receipt of
insurance claim, the same shall be chargeable to tax as capital gains.
The capital gains has to be computed by reducing the cost of
acquisition of jewellery from the insurance compensation of
` 1,80,000.
5. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains”
of Mr. Sarthak for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Capital Gains on sale of residential house
Actual sale consideration ` 1,50,00,000
Value adopted by Stamp Valuation Authority ` 1,70,00,000
on the date of agreement
[As per section 50C, where the actual sale consideration is
less than the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority
for the purpose of charging stamp duty, and such stamp duty
value exceeds 110% of the actual sale consideration, then, the
value adopted by the Stamp Valuation Authority shall be
taken to be the full value of consideration.
In a case where the date of agreement is different from the
date of registration, stamp duty value on the date of
agreement can be considered provided the whole or part of
the consideration is paid by way of account payee
cheque/bank draft or by way of ECS through bank account or
through such other electronic mode as may be prescribed, on
or before the date of agreement.
In this case, since 20% of ` 150 lakhs is paid through account
payee bank draft on the date of agreement, stamp duty value
on the date of agreement would be considered for
determining the full value of consideration]
Full value of sale consideration [Stamp duty value on the 1,70,00,000
date of agreement, since it exceeds 110% of the actual sale
consideration]
Less: Cost of acquisition of residential house 30,00,000
Long-term capital gains [Since the residential house property 1,40,00,000
was held by Mr. Sarthak for more than 24 months immediately
preceding the date of its transfer]
Less: Exemption u/s 54 55,00,000
Since, long-term capital gains does not exceed ` 2 crore, he
would be eligible for exemption in respect of both the
residential house properties purchased in India. The capital
gain arising on transfer of a long-term residential property
shall not be chargeable to tax to the extent such capital gain
is invested in the purchase of these residential house
properties in India within one year before or two years after
the date of transfer of original asset. Thus, he would be
eligible for exemption of ` 55,00,000 being ` 20,00,000 and
` 35,00,000 invested on acquisition of residential house
property in Kanpur and Delhi, respectively.
Long term capital gains chargeable to tax 85,00,000
Note: It may be noted that since Sarthak has transferred residential house
property on or after 23.7.2024 which was acquired before the said date, he
can opt to pay tax @20% on LTCG (computed with indexation) or 12.5% on
LTCG (computed without indexation) whichever is beneficial to him.
6. Computation of income chargeable under the head “Capital Gains” of
Mrs. Yuvika for A.Y.2025-26
` `
Particulars
(in lakhs) (in lakhs)
Capital Gains on sale of residential building
Actual sale consideration ` 810 lakhs
Value adopted by Stamp Valuation Authority
` 890 lakhs
[Where the actual sale consideration is less than
the value adopted by the Stamp Valuation
Authority for the purpose of charging stamp duty,
and such stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the
actual sale consideration, then, the value adopted
by the Stamp Valuation Authority shall be taken
to be the full value of consideration as per section
50C.
However, where the date of agreement is different
from the date of registration, stamp duty value on
the date of agreement can be considered
provided the whole or part of the consideration is
received by way of account payee cheque/bank
draft or by way of ECS through bank account or
through prescribed electronic modes on or before
the date of agreement.
In this case, since advance of ` 80 lakh is received
by RTGS, i.e., one of the prescribed modes, stamp
duty value on the date of agreement can be
adopted as the full value of consideration.
However, in the present case since stamp duty
value on the date of agreement does not exceed
110% of the actual consideration, actual sale
consideration would be taken as the full value of
consideration]
Gross Sale consideration (Actual consideration, 810.00
since stamp duty value on the date of agreement
does not exceed 110% of the actual
consideration)
Less: Brokerage @1% of sale consideration (1% of
` 810 lakhs) 8.10
Net Sale consideration 801.90
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition
- Cost of vacant land, ` 80 lakhs, plus 273.03
registration and other expenses i.e.,
` 8 lakhs, being 10% of cost of land
[` 88 lakhs × 363/117]
- Construction cost of residential
building (` 100 lakhs x 363/129) 281.40 554.43
Long-term capital gains 247.47
Since the residential house property was held by
Mrs. Yuvika for more than 24 months immediately
preceding the date of its transfer, the resultant
gain is a long-term capital gain]
Less: Exemption under section 54 130.00
Where long-term capital gains exceed ` 2
crore, the capital gain arising on transfer of
a long-term residential property shall not be
chargeable to tax to the extent such capital
gain is invested in the purchase of one
residential house property in India, one year
before or two years after the date of transfer
of original asset.
Therefore, in the present case, the
exemption would be available only in
respect of the one residential house
acquired in India and not in respect of the
residential house in UK. It would be more
beneficial for her to claim the cost of
acquisition of residential house at Delhi, i.e.,
` 130 lakhs as exemption.
Less: Exemption under section 54EC 50.00
Amount invested in capital gains bonds of
NHAI within six months after the date of
transfer (i.e., on or before 13.1.2025), of
long-term capital asset, being land or
building or both, would qualify for
exemption, to the maximum extent of ` 50
lakhs, whether such investment is made in
the current financial year or subsequent
financial year. Therefore, in the present case,
exemption can be availed only to the extent
of ` 50 lakh out of ` 90 lakhs, even if the
both the investments are made on or before
13.1.2025 (i.e., within six months after the
date of transfer).
Long term capital gains chargeable to tax 67.47
Note: Advance of ` 20 lakhs received from Mr. Johar, would have been
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”, in the
A.Y. 2016-17, as per section 56(2)(ix), since the same was forfeited on or after
01.4.2014 as a result of failure of negotiation. Hence, the same should not be
deducted while computing indexed cost of acquisition.
7. Computation of Capital gains in the hands
of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Amount (`) Amount (`)
Actual sale consideration 30,50,000
Valuation as per Stamp duty Authority on 39,00,000
the date of agreement
(Where the actual sale consideration is less
than the value adopted by the Stamp
Valuation Authority for the purpose of
charging stamp duty, and such stamp duty
value exceeds 110% of the actual sale
consideration then, the value adopted by
the Stamp Valuation Authority shall be
taken to be the full value of consideration
as per section 50C.
However, where the date of agreement is
different from the date of registration, stamp
duty value on the date of agreement can be
considered, provided the whole or part of the
consideration is received by way of account
payee cheque/bank draft or by way of ECS
through bank account or such other
electronic mode as may be prescribed on or
before the date of agreement.
In the present case, since part of the
payment is made by account payee cheque
on the date of agreement, the stamp duty
value on the date of agreement would be
considered as full value of consideration)
Deemed Full value of consideration [Since 39,00,000
stamp duty value on the date of agreement
exceeds 110% of the actual consideration,
stamp duty value would be deemed as Full
Value of Consideration]
Less: Expenses on transfer (Brokerage @1% 30,500
of ` 30,50,000)
Net sale consideration 38,69,500
Less: Cost of acquisition (Note 1) 9 ,59,000
Less: Cost of improvement 3,90,000 13,49,000
Long term capital gain 25,20,500
Computation of tax liability u/s 112
Particulars Amount
(`)
On LTCG of ` 25,20,500 x 12.5% 3,15,063
Add: Health and Education cess @4% 12,603
3,27,666
On LTCG with indexation benefit
Net Sale consideration 38,69,500
Less: Indexed cost of acquisition 34,81,170
(` 9,59,000 x 363/100)
Less: Indexed cost of Improvement 5,57,362
[` 3,90,000 x 363/254]
Long-term capital loss (1,69,032)
Since the computation results in a long term capital loss, if indexation benefit
is given, the tax u/s 112 would be Nil. However, this computation is only for
determining tax liability, the said loss can neither be set-off nor carried
forward.
Notes:
(1) Computation of cost of acquisition
Particulars Amount (`) Amount (`)
Cost of acquisition, 10,70,000
Being the higher of
(i) lower of Fair market value i.e., 10,70,000
` 11,85,000 and Stamp duty value
i.e., ` 10,70,000, on April 1, 2001
(ii) Actual cost of acquisition 3,59,000
(` 3,24,000 + ` 35,000, being stamp
duty @10% of ` 3,50,000)
Less: Advance money taken from
Mr. Mohan and forfeited 1,11,000
Cost of acquisition 9,59,000
(2) Where advance money has been received by the assessee, and
retained by him, as a result of failure of the negotiations, section 51
will apply. The advance retained by the assessee will go to reduce the
cost of acquisition. Accordingly, cost of acquisition after reducing the
advance money forfeited would be ` 9,59,000 [i.e. ` 10,70,000 –
` 1,11,000 (being the advance money forfeited during the P.Y.
2008-09)]. However, where the advance money is forfeited during the
previous year 2014-15 or thereafter, the amount forfeited would be
taxable under the head “Income from Other Sources” and such
amount will not be deducted from the cost of acquisition of such asset
while calculating capital gains. Hence, ` 1,51,000, being the advance
received from Ms. Deepshikha and retained by him, would have been
taxable under the head “Income from other sources” in the hands of
Mr. Shiva in A.Y.2016-17.
3.4 86 INCOME TAX LAW
UNIT – 5 : INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this unit, you would be able to-
 identify the income, which are chargeable to tax under the
head “Income from other sources”;
 examine the transactions of receipt of money and property
without consideration or for inadequate consideration to
determine whether such receipts are chargeable to tax
under this head;
 identify and comprehend the admissible deductions while
computing income under this head;
 identify and comprehend the inadmissible deductions
while computing income under this head;
 compute the tax on casual income by applying the rate of
tax applicable on such income;
 compute the income chargeable to tax under this head.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 87
Proforma for computation of “Income from Other Sources”
Particulars Amt
(i) Dividend Income xxx
(ii) Casual Income (winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles, races xxx
including horse races, card games and other games, gambling,
betting etc.)
(iii) Interest received on compensation/ enhanced compensation xxx
deemed to be income in the year of receipt [Section 56(2)(viii)]
(iv) Advance forfeited due to failure of negotiations for transfer of a xxx
capital asset [Section 56(2)(ix)]
(v) Sum of money or property received by any person [Section 56(2)(x)] xxx
(vi) Compensation or other payment, due to or received by any xxx
person, in connection with termination of his employment or the
modification of the terms and conditions relating thereto
[Section 56(2)(xi)]
(vii) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, xxx
under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance
policy, which is not exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xii)]
(viii) The following income, if not chargeable under the head “Profits
and gains of business or profession”
(a) Any sum received by an employer from his xxx
employees as contributions to any provident fund,
superannuation fund or any other fund for the
welfare of the employees
(b) Interest on securities xxx
(c) Income from letting out on hire of machinery, plant xxx
or furniture
(d) Where letting out of buildings is inseparable from xxx
the letting out of machinery, plant or furniture, the
income from such letting
(e) Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy xxx xxx
including bonus on such policy (if not chargeable to
tax under the head “Salaries” also)
(ix) Any income chargeable to tax under the Act, but not falling xxx
under any other head of income
3.4 88 INCOME TAX LAW
(x) Deemed income u/s 59 – Remission or cessation of a trading
liability or receipt of any amount in respect of loss or
expenditure allowed as deduction in an earlier P.Y. xxx
xxx
Less: Deductions allowable [Section 57]
(a) In case of dividends [other than dividend referred u/s xxx
2(22)(f)] or income in respect of units of a mutual
fund or income in respect of units from a specified
company
- interest expenditure allowable as deduction subject to
a maximum of 20% of such income included in the
total income for that year, without deduction under
this section
(b) In case of interest on securities xxx
- Any reasonable sum paid by way of commission or
remuneration to a banker or any other person
(c) Income consists of recovery from employees as xxx
contribution to any PF, superannuation fund etc.
- Amount of contribution remitted before the due date
under the respective Acts, in accordance with the
provisions of section 36(1)(va)
(d) Income from letting on hire of machinery, plant and xxx
furniture, with or without building
- current repairs to the machinery, plant, furniture or
building
- insurance premium
- depreciation/unabsorbed depreciation
(e) Family Pension – 33-1/3% of such income or ` 15,000 xxx
(in case of optional tax regime) or 25,000 (in case of
default tax regime u/s 115BAC), whichever is less.
(f) Interest on compensation/enhanced compensation xxx
received – 50% of such interest
(g) Any other expenditure not in the nature of capital
expenditure incurred wholly and exclusively for earning
such income xxx xxx
Income from Other Sources xxx
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 89
Deductions not allowable [Section 58]
(a) Any personal expense of the assessee.
(b) Any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside
India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
(c) Any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable outside
India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source therefrom.
(d) 30% of sum payable to a resident on which tax is deductible at source, if
such tax has not been deducted or after deduction has not been paid on
or before the due date of return specified in section 139(1).
(e) Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related
person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or unreasonable by
the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV.
(f) Any expenditure in respect of which a payment or aggregate payments
exceeding ` 10,000 is made to a person in a day otherwise than by
account payee cheque/bank draft or ECS through bank account or
through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit
card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay.
Tax on Income from Other Sources
Income Winnings from Unexplained Net winnings Other
lotteries, cash credits/ from online Income
crossword investments/ games
puzzles, races money, bullion,
including horse jewellery etc./
races, card games expenditure, etc.
and other games,
gambling, betting
etc. (other than
winning from any
online game)
Section Section 115BB Section 115BBE Section -
115BBJ
Tax rate 30% of such 60% of such 30% of such Normal
winnings (further income plus winnings rates of tax
increased by surcharge (further
surcharge, if @25% of tax increased by
3.4 90 INCOME TAX LAW
Tax on Income from Other Sources
applicable, and (Effective rate of surcharge, if
health and tax is 78%, applicable,
education including health and health and
cess@4%) and education education
cess@4%) cess@4%)
Other ➢ No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from Deductions
conditions such income. specified in
➢ Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable section 57
from such income. allowable,
subject to
➢ Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit
limits
is also not permitted against such income.
mentioned
➢ Set-off of losses is not permissible against such
thereunder.
income.
Section 58
specifies
the
deductions
not
allowable.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Any income, profits or gains includible in the total income of an assessee, which
cannot be included under any of the preceding heads of income, is chargeable
under the head ‘Income from other sources’. Thus, this head is the residuary head
of income and brings within its scope all the taxable income, profits or gains of an
assessee which fall outside the scope of any other head. Therefore, when any
income, profit or gain does not fall precisely under any of the other specific heads
but is chargeable under the provisions of the Act, it would be charged under this
head.
5.2 METHOD OF ACCOUNTING [SECTION 145]
Income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” has to be
computed in accordance with the cash or mercantile system of accounting
regularly employed by the assessee.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 91
5.3 INCOMES CHARGEABLE UNDER THIS HEAD
[SECTION 56]
(i) The income chargeable only under the head ‘Income from other sources’
(1) Dividend income [Section 56(2)(i)]
Dividend income is always taxable under the head “Income from other
sources”. The term ‘dividend’ as used in the Act has a wider scope and
meaning than under the general law.
Deemed dividend [Sections 2(22)(a) to (f)]:
According to section 2(22), the following receipts are deemed to be
dividend:
(a) Distribution of accumulated profits, entailing the release of
company’s assets - Any distribution of accumulated profits, whether
capitalised or not, by a company to its shareholders is dividend if it
entails the release of all or any part of its assets.
Note: If accumulated profits are distributed in cash, it is dividend in
the hands of the shareholders. Where accumulated profits are
distributed in kind, for example by delivery of shares etc. entailing the
release of company’s assets, the market value of such shares on the
date of such distribution is deemed as dividend in the hands of the
shareholder.
(b) Distribution of debentures, deposit certificates to shareholders
and bonus shares to preference shareholders - Any distribution to
its shareholders by a company of debentures, debenture stock or
deposit certificate in any form, whether with or without interest, and
any distribution of bonus shares to preference shareholders to the
extent to which the company possesses accumulated profits, whether
capitalised or not, will be deemed as dividend.
The market value of such bonus shares is deemed as dividend in the
hands of the preference shareholder.
In the case of debentures, debenture stock etc., their value is to be
taken at the market rate and if there is no market rate they should be
valued according to accepted principles of valuation.
3.4 92 INCOME TAX LAW
Note: Bonus shares given to equity shareholders are not treated as
dividend.
(c) Distribution on liquidation - Any distribution made to the
shareholders of a company on its liquidation, to the extent to which
the distribution is attributable to the accumulated profits of the
company immediately before its liquidation, whether capitalised or
not, is deemed to be dividend income.
Note: Any distribution made out of the profits of the company after
the date of the liquidation cannot amount to dividend. It is a
repayment towards capital.
(d) Distribution on reduction of capital - Any distribution to its
shareholders by a company on the reduction of its capital to the
extent to which the company possessed accumulated profits, whether
capitalised or not, shall be deemed to be dividend.
(e) Advance or loan by a closely held company to its shareholder -
Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially
interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to any shareholder
who is the beneficial owner of 10% or more of the equity capital of the
company will be deemed to be dividend to the extent of the
accumulated profits. If the loan is not covered by the accumulated
profits, it is not deemed to be dividend.
Advance or loan by a closely held company to a specified concern
- Any payment by a company in which the public are not substantially
interested, to any concern (i.e. HUF/Firm/AOP/BOI/Company) in which
a shareholder, having the beneficial ownership of atleast 10% of the
equity shares is a member or a partner and in which he has a
substantial interest (i.e. atleast 20% share of the income of the
concern) will be deemed to be dividend.
Also, any payments by such a closely held company on behalf of, or
for the individual benefit of any such shareholder will also be deemed
to be dividend. However, in both cases the ceiling limit of dividend is
to the extent of accumulated profits.
Exceptions: The following payments or loan given would not be
deemed as dividend:
(i) Loan granted in the ordinary course of business - If the loan
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 93
is granted in the ordinary course of its business and lending of
money is a substantial part of the company’s business, the loan
or advance to a shareholder or to the specified concern is not
deemed to be dividend.
(ii) Dividend paid is set off against the deemed dividend - Where
a loan had been treated as dividend and subsequently, the
company declares and distributes dividend to all its shareholders
including the borrowing shareholder, and the dividend so paid is
set off by the company against the previous borrowing, the
adjusted amount will not be again treated as a dividend.
Note: Subsequent repayment of loan or charge of interest at market rate
does not make any difference in the applicability of section 2(22)(e).
(f) Amount received by shareholder on buy-back of shares by
domestic companies: In case of buyback of shares (whether listed or
unlisted) before 1.10.2024 by a domestic companys, additional income-
tax@20% (plus surcharge @12% and cess@4%) is leviable in the hands
of the company1. Consequently, the income arising to the shareholders
in respect of such buyback of shares by the domestic company is exempt
under section 10(34A).
However, in case of buyback of shares (whether listed or unlisted) on or
after 1.10.2024 by a domestic company,, any sum paid by the domestic
company for purchase of its own shares would be deemed as dividend in
the hands of shareholders and shall be charged to income-tax at
applicable tax rates. No deduction for expenses would be available
against such dividend income while determining the income from other
sources.
Below here is the example to understand the provisions of section 46A
and section 2(22)(f):
No. of shares of A Ltd. bought in 2020 By Mr. B @` 40 100 shares
per share
Total cost of acquisition ` 4,000
(100 x ` 40)
No. of shares bought back in November 2024 by A Ltd. 20 shares
@` 60 per share
1Under section 115QA
3.4 94 INCOME TAX LAW
Income taxable as deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(f) [` 60 ` 1,200
per share x 20 shares]
Long-term capital loss on such buyback as per section ` 800
46A (Value of consideration - COA) (Nil - ` 40 x 20)
[Such LTCL can be set-off against other LTCG or it can
be carried forward to the next year for set-off against
other LTCG]
No. of shares sold in December 2025 by Mr. B @` 70 per 50 Shares
share
Long-term capital Gain (` 70 x 50 – ` 40 x 50) ` 1,500
Chargeable long-term capital gain in P.Y. 2025-26 after ` 700
set-off of long-term capital loss [` 1,500 – ` 800] would
be
Exceptions: The following do not constitute “dividend” –
(i) Distribution in respect of non-participating shares issued for full
cash consideration – Any distribution made in accordance with (c) or
(d) in respect of any share issued for full cash consideration and the
holder of such share is not entitled to participate in the surplus asset in
the event of liquidation.
(ii) Payment on buy back of shares – Any payment made by a company
on purchase of its own shares upto 30th September, 2024, from a
shareholder in accordance with the provisions of section 77A of the
Companies Act, 19562;
(iii) Distribution of shares to the shareholders on demerger by the
resulting company - Any distribution of shares on demerger by the
resulting companies to the shareholders of the demerged company
(whether or not there is a reduction of capital in the demerged
company).
Meaning of “accumulated profits”
Accumulated profits in point (a), (b), (d) and (e) above include all profits of
the company up to the date of distribution or payment of dividend.
Accumulated profits in point (c) include all profits of the company up to the
date of liquidation whether capitalised or not.
2 Now section 58 of the Companies Act, 2013
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 95
In the case of an amalgamated company, the accumulated profits, whether
capitalized or not, of the amalgamating company on the date of
amalgamation shall be included in the accumulated profits, whether
capitalized or not or loss, as the case may be, of the amalgamated company.
Clarification regarding trade advance not to be treated as deemed
dividend under section 2(22)(e) – [Circular No. 19/2017, dated
12.06.2017]
Section 2(22)(e) provides that "dividend" includes any payment by a
company in which public are not substantially interested, of any sum by way
of advance or loan to a shareholder who is the beneficial owner of shares
holding not less than 10% of the voting power, or to any concern in which
such shareholder is a member or a partner and in which he has a substantial
interest or any payment by any such company on behalf, or for the
individual benefit, of any such shareholder, to the extent to which the
company in either case possesses accumulated profits.
The CBDT observed that some Courts in the recent past have held that trade
advances in the nature of commercial transactions would not fall within the
ambit of the provisions of section 2(22)(e) and such views have attained
finality.
In view of the above, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that it is a
settled position that trade advances, which are in the nature of commercial
transactions, would not fall within the ambit of the word 'advance' in section
2(22)(e) and therefore, the same would not to be treated as deemed
dividend.
Basis of charge of dividend [Section 8]
Dividend declared or distributed or paid by a company is deemed to be the
income of the shareholder in the previous year in which it is so declared or
distributed or paid, as the case may be.
Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) – Distribution by a company
which is deemed as dividend u/s 2(22)(a)/(b)/(c)/(d) would be the income of
the previous year in which it is so distributed.
Deemed dividend u/s 2(22)(e) – Payment of advance or loan to a
shareholder or a concern, as the case may be, which is deemed as dividend
u/s 2(22)(e) will be the income of the previous year in which it is so paid.
3.4 96 INCOME TAX LAW
Interim dividend – Interim dividend would be deemed to be the income of
the previous year in which such dividend id unconditionally made available
by the company to the members who is entitled to it.
Tax rate on dividend income - Any income by way of dividends received
by a resident from a company, whether domestic or foreign, is taxable in the
hands of a resident shareholder at normal rates of tax.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Rahul, a resident Indian, holding 28% of equity shares in a company, took a
loan of ` 5,00,000 from the same company. On the date of granting the loan,
the company had accumulated profit of ` 4,00,000. The company is engaged
in some manufacturing activity.
(i) Is the amount of loan taxable as deemed dividend, if the company is a
company in which the public are substantially interested?
(ii) What would be your answer, if the lending company is a private limited
company (i.e. which is not a company in which the public are
substantially interested)?
SOLUTION
Any payment by a company, other than a company in which the public are
substantially interested, of any sum by way of advance or loan to an equity
shareholder, being a person who is the beneficial owner of shares holding
not less than 10% of the voting power, is deemed as dividend under section
2(22)(e), to the extent the company possesses accumulated profits.
(i) The provisions of section 2(22)(e), however, will not apply where the
loan is given by a company in which public are substantially
interested. In such a case, the loan would not be taxable as deemed
dividend.
(ii) However, if the loan is taken from a private company (i.e., a company
in which the public are not substantially interested), which is a not a
company where lending of money is a substantial part of the business
of the company, the provisions of section 2(22)(e) would be attracted.
In this case, since the company is a manufacturing company and not a
lending company and Rahul holds more than 10% of the equity shares
in the company, the provisions of section 2(22)(e) would be attracted.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 97
The amount chargeable as deemed dividend cannot, however, exceed
the accumulated profits held by the company on the date of giving
the loan. Therefore, the amount taxable as deemed dividend would be
limited to the accumulated profit i.e., ` 4,00,000 and not the amount
of loan which is ` 5,00,000.
(2) Casual Income [Section 56(2)(ib)]
Casual income means income in the nature of winnings from lotteries,
crossword puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other
games of any sort, gambling, betting etc.
Casual income is chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other
Sources”.
(3) Interest received on compensation/ enhanced compensation deemed to
be income in the year of receipt and taxable under the head “Income
from Other Sources” [Sections 56(2)(viii)]
(i) As per section 145(1), income chargeable under the head “Profits and
gains of business or profession” or “Income from other sources”, shall
be computed in accordance with either cash or mercantile system of
accounting regularly employed by the assessee.
(ii) Section 145B(1) provides that notwithstanding anything contained in
section 145(1), the interest received by an assessee on compensation
or on enhanced compensation shall be deemed to be his income for
the year in which it is received, irrespective of the method of
accounting followed by the assessee.
(iii) Section 56(2)(viii) provides that income by way of interest received on
compensation or on enhanced compensation referred to in section
145B(1) shall be assessed as “Income from other sources” in the year
in which it is received.
(4) Advance forfeited due to failure of negotiations for transfer of a
capital asset to be taxable as “Income from other sources”
[Section 56(2)(ix)]
(i) Prior to A.Y. 2015-16, any advance retained or received in respect of a
negotiation for transfer which failed to materialise is reduced from the
cost of acquisition of the asset or the written down value or the fair
3.4 98 INCOME TAX LAW
market value of the asset, at the time of its transfer to compute the
capital gains arising therefrom as per section 51. In case the asset
transferred is a long-term capital asset, indexation benefit would be
on the cost so reduced.
(ii) With effect from A.Y. 2015-16, section 56(2)(ix) provides for the
taxability of any sum of money, received as an advance or otherwise in
the course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset. Such sum
shall be chargeable to income-tax under the head ‘Income from other
sources’, if such sum is forfeited and the negotiations do not result in
transfer of such capital asset.
(iii) In order to avoid double taxation of the advance received and
retained, section 51 was amended to provide that where any sum of
money received as an advance or otherwise in the course of
negotiations for transfer of a capital asset, has been included in the
total income of the assessee for any previous year, in accordance with
section 56(2)(ix), such amount shall not be deducted from the cost for
which the asset was acquired or the written down value or the fair
market value, as the case may be, in computing the cost of acquisition.
(iv) It may be noted that advance received and forfeited upto 31.3.2014
has to be reduced from cost of acquisition while computing capital
gains, since such advance would not have been subject to tax under
section 56(2)(ix). Only the advance received and forfeited on or after
1.4.2014 would be subject to tax under section 56(2)(ix). Hence, such
advance would not be reduced from the cost of acquisition for
computing capital gains.
(5) Any sum of money or value of property received without consideration
or for inadequate consideration to be subject to tax in the hands of the
recipient [Section 56(2)(x)]
(i) In order to prevent the practice of receiving sum of money or the
property without consideration or for inadequate consideration,
section 56(2)(x) brings to tax any sum of money or the value of any
property received by any person without consideration or the value of
any property received for inadequate consideration.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.4 99
(ii) Sum of Money: If any sum of money is received without consideration
and the aggregate value of which exceeds ` 50,000, the whole of the
aggregate value of such sum is chargeable to tax.
(iii) Immovable property [Land or building or both]:
I. If an immovable property is received -
(a) Without consideration: The stamp duty value of such
property would be taxed as the income of the recipient if it
exceeds ` 50,000.
(b) For Inadequate consideration: If consideration is less
than the stamp duty value of the property and the
difference between the stamp duty value and
consideration is more than the higher of –
(i) ` 50,000 and
(ii) 10% of consideration,
the difference between the stamp duty value and the
consideration shall be chargeable to tax in the hands of
the assessee as “Income from other sources”.
II. Value to be considered where the date of agreement is
different from date of registration: Taking into consideration
the possible time gap between the date of agreement and the
date of registration, the stamp duty value may be taken as on
the date of agreement instead of the date of registration, if the
date of the agreement fixing the amount of consideration for
the transfer of the immovable property and the date of
registration are not the same, provided whole or part of the
consideration has been paid by way of an account payee cheque
or an account payee bank draft or by use of electronic clearing
system (ECS) through a bank account or through such prescribed
electronic mode on or before the date of agreement.
The prescribed electronic modes notified are credit card, debit
card, net banking, IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement),
NEFT (National Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat
3.5 00 INCOME TAX LAW
Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay as other electronic modes of
payment [CBDT Notification No. 8/2020 dated 29.01.2020].
III. If the stamp duty value of immovable property is disputed
by the assessee, the Assessing Officer may refer the valuation of
such property to a Valuation Officer. If such value is less than the
stamp duty value, the same would be taken for determining the
value of such property, for computation of income under this
head in the hands of the buyer.
(iv) Movable Property [Property, other than immovable property]:
If movable property is received -
(a) Without consideration: The aggregate fair market value of such
property on the date of receipt would be taxed as the income of
the recipient, if it exceeds ` 50,000.
(b) For inadequate consideration: If the difference between the
aggregate fair market value and such consideration exceeds ` 50,000,
such difference would be taxed as the income of the recipient.
(v) Applicability of section 56(2)(x): The provisions of section 56(2)(x)
would apply only to property which is the nature of a capital asset of
the recipient and not stock-in-trade, raw material or consumable
stores of any business of the recipient. Therefore, only transfer of a
capital asset, without consideration or for inadequate consideration
would attract the provisions of section 56(2)(x).
(vi) The table below summarizes the scheme of taxability of gifts –
Nature of Taxable value
asset
1 Money The whole amount if the same exceeds ` 50,000.
2 Movable (i) Without consideration:
property The aggregate fair market value of the property,
if it exceeds ` 50,000.
(ii) Inadequate consideration:
The difference between the aggregate fair
market value and the consideration, if such
difference exceeds ` 50,000.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 01
3 Immovable (i) Without consideration:
property The stamp value of the property, if it exceeds
` 50,000.
(ii) Inadequate consideration:
The difference between the stamp duty value
and the consideration, if such difference is more
than the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of
consideration.
(vii) Non-applicability of section 56(2)(x): However, any sum of money
or value of property received, in the following circumstances would be
outside the ambit of section 56(2)(x) -
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer or donor, as the case
may be; or
(e) from any local authority3; or
(f) from any fund or foundation or university or other educational
institution or hospital or other medical institution or any trust or
institution4; or
(g) from or by any trust or institution registered5; or
(h) by any fund or trust or institution or any university or other
educational institution or any hospital or other medical institution6.
(i) by way of transaction not regarded as transfer7 under section
47(i)/(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(vib)/(vid)/(vii).
(j) from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the
benefit of relative of the individual.
3as defined in the Explanation to section 10(20)
4referred to in section 10(23C)
5under section 12AA or section 12AB
6referred to in section 10(23C)(iv)/(v)/(vi)/(via)
7under section 47(via)/(viaa)/(vic)/(vica)/(vicb)/(viiac)/(viiad)/(viiae)/(viiaf)
3.5 02 INCOME TAX LAW
(k) from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as
may be prescribed.
(l) by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure
actually incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment
of any member of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19
subject to conditions notified by the Central Government
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No.
91/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified that for such purpose, the
individual has to keep a record of the following documents,
namely:-
(a) the COVID-19 positive report of the individual or his family
member, or medical report if clinically determined to be
COVID-19 positive through investigations in a hospital or an
in-patient facility by a treating physician for a person so
admitted;
(b) all necessary documents of medical diagnosis or treatment
of the individual or family member due to COVID-19 or
illness related to COVID-19 suffered within 6 months from
the date of being determined as a COVID-19 positive;
The details of the amount so received in any financial year has to
be furnished in the prescribed form to the Income-tax
Department within 9 months from the end of such financial year.
(m) by a member of the family of a deceased person -
(A) from the employer of the deceased person (without any limit);
or
(B) from any other person or persons to the extent that such
sum or aggregate of such sums ≤ ` 10 lakhs,
where the cause of death of such person is illness related to
COVID-19 and the payment is—
(i) received within 12 months from the date of death of such
person; and
(ii) subject to such other conditions notified by the Central
Government.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 03
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No.
92/2022 dated 5.8.2022, specified the following conditions -
1. (i) the death of the individual should be within 6
months from the date of testing positive or from the
date of being clinically determined as a COVID-19
case, for which any sum of money has been received
by the member of the family;
(ii) the family member of the individual has to keep a
record of the following documents,
(a) the COVID-19 positive report of the individual,
or medical report if clinically determined to be
COVID-19 positive through investigations in a
hospital or an inpatient facility by a treating
physician;
(b) a medical report or death certificate issued by a
medical practitioner or a Government civil
registration office, in which it is stated that death of
the person is related to corona virus disease
(COVID-19).
2. The details of such amount received in any financial year has
to be furnished in the prescribed form to the Assessing
Officer within 9 months from the end of such financial year.
(viii) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
Property A capital asset of the assessee, namely,-
(a) immovable property being land or building or both,
(b) shares and securities,
(c) jewellery,
(d) archaeological collections,
(e) drawings,
(f) paintings,
3.5 04 INCOME TAX LAW
(g) sculptures,
(h) any work of art or
(i) bullion.
It also includes virtual digital asset8.
Relative (a) In case of an individual –
(i) spouse of the individual;
(ii) brother or sister of the individual;
(iii) brother or sister of the spouse of the
individual;
(iv) brother or sister of either of the parents of the
individual;
(v) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the
individual;
(vi) any lineal ascendant or descendant of the spouse
of the individual;
(vii) spouse of any of the persons referred in (i) to
(vi) above.
(b) In case of Hindu Undivided Family, any member
thereof.
Family For the purpose of (l) and (m) in page 3.498, family in
relation to an individual means
(i) the spouse and children of the individual; and
(ii) the parents, brothers and sisters of the individual or
any of them, wholly or mainly dependent on the
individual.
8 The provisions relating to Virtual digital asset will be dealt with at Final level.
noitaredisnoc
etauqedani
rof
ytreporp
elbavommi
fo
refsnart
no
snoitacilpmi
SDT/xaT
reyub
eht
fo
sdnah
eht
nI
relles
eht
fo
sdnah
eht
nI
fo
refsnart
rof noitaredisnoc
eht
sI
eht
morf
tnereffid
tnemeerga
fo
etad
eht
sI
?shkal
`
naht
ssel
VDS
dna
B
&
L
?noitartsiger
fo
etad
sa
dleh
era
B
&
L
fI
sa
dleh
era
B
& L
fI
oN
seY
tessA
latipaC
edart-ni-kcots
oN
seY
etad
eht
no
VDS
eht
fo
trap
ro
elohw
sI
oN
noitartsiger
fo
c/A
fo
yaw
yb
diap
noitaredisnoc
ylppa
lliw
C05
noitceS
ylppa
lliw
AC34
noitceS
eht
fo
%1@
xaT
eb
ot
si
xat
oN
eb
dluow
SCE/tfarD
knaB
/euqehC
eeyap
si
rehgih
detcuded
deredisnoc
debircserp
s ree
hY to
hcus
hguorht
ro
eht
ta
elbitcuded
eht
erofeb
ro
no
edom
cinortcele
tnemeerga
fo
etad
sI
ro
tiderc
fo emit
?tnemeerga
fo etad
fo
etad
eht
no
VDS
fo
etad
eht
morf
tnereffid
,tnemyap
eb
yam
noitartsiger
seY
?noitartsiger
reilrae
si
revehcihw
lluf
eht
sa
nekat
AI-491
s/u
fo
etad
eht
no
VDS
fo
eulav
eb
yam
tnemeerga
oN
fi ,noitaredisnoc
deredisnoc
seY
%011
sdeecxe
VDS
lautca
dna
eulav
ytud
pmats
neewteb
ecnereffiD
lautca
eht
fo
hcus
fi ,)x()2(65
s/u
elbaxat
eb
lliw
noitaredisnoc
fo etad
eht
no
VDS
eht
fo
trap
ro
elohw
sI
noitaredisnoc
fo
rehgih
eht
naht
erom
si
ecnereffid
yb
deviecer
noitaredisnoc
sa nekat
eb
yam
tnemeerga
noitaredisnoc
fo
%01
dna
000,05
`
/euqehc
eeyap
c/A
fo
yaw
fo
eulav
lluf
eht
seY
hguorht
SCE
ro
tfarD
knaB
naht
rehto
gnidliuB
dna
dnaL
–
B &
L
VDS
hcus
fi
,noitaredisnoc
hcus
hguorht
ro
c/A
knaB
dnal
larutlucirga
lautca
fo
%011
sdeecxe
cinortcele
debircserp
rehto
noitaredisnoc
etad
eht
erofeb
ro no
edom
oN
eulaV
ytuD
pmatS
–
VDS
?tnemeerga
fo
.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 05
3.5 06 INCOME TAX LAW
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. A, a dealer in shares, received the following without consideration during the
P.Y. 2024-25 from his friend Mr. B, -
(1) Cash gift of ` 75,000 on his anniversary, 15th April, 2024.
(2) Bullion, the fair market value of which was ` 60,000, on his birthday,
19th June, 2024.
(3) A plot of land at Faridabad on 1st July, 2024, the stamp value of which is
` 5 lakh on that date. Mr. B had purchased the land in April, 2009.
Mr. A purchased from his friend Mr. C, who is also a dealer in shares, 1000 shares of X
Ltd. @ ` 400 each on 19th June, 2023, the fair market value of which was ` 600 each on
that date. Mr. A sold these shares in the course of his business on 23rd June, 2024.
Further, on 1st November, 2024, Mr. A took possession of property (office building)
booked by him two years back at ` 20 lakh. The stamp duty value of the property as on
1st November, 2024 was ` 32 lakh and on the date of booking was ` 23 lakh. He had
paid ` 1 lakh by account payee cheque as down payment on the date of booking.
On 1st March, 2025, he sold the plot of land at Faridabad for ` 7 lakh.
Compute the income of Mr. A chargeable under the head “Income from other
sources” and “Capital Gains” for A.Y. 2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of “Income from other sources” of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26
`
Particulars
(1) Cash gift is taxable under section 56(2)(x), since it exceeds 75,000
` 50,000
(2) Since bullion is included in the definition of property, 60,000
therefore, when bullion is received without consideration, the
same is taxable, since the aggregate fair market value exceeds
` 50,000
(3) Stamp value of plot of land at Faridabad, received without 5,00,000
consideration, is taxable under section 56(2)(x)
(4) Difference of ` 2 lakh in the value of shares of X Ltd. -
purchased from Mr. C, a dealer in shares, is not taxable as it
represents the stock-in-trade of Mr. A. Since Mr. A is a dealer
in shares and it has been mentioned that the shares were
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 07
subsequently sold in the course of his business, such shares
represent the stock-in-trade of Mr. A.
(5) Difference between the stamp duty value of ` 23 lakh on the
date of booking and the actual consideration of ` 20 lakh paid
is taxable under section 56(2)(x) since the difference exceeds
` 2,00,000, being the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of 3,00,000
consideration
Income from Other Sources 9,35,000
Computation of “Capital Gains” of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26
`
Particulars
Sale Consideration 7,00,000
Less: Cost of acquisition [deemed to be the stamp value 5,00,000
charged to tax under section 56(2)(x) as per section 49(4)]
Short-term capital gains 2,00,000
Note – The resultant capital gains will be short-term capital gains since for
calculating the period of holding, the period of holding of previous owner is not to
be considered.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Discuss the taxability or otherwise of the following in the hands of the recipient
under section 56(2)(x) the Income-tax Act, 1961 -
(i) Akhil HUF received ` 75,000 in cash from niece of Akhil (i.e., daughter of
Akhil’s sister). Akhil is the Karta of the HUF.
(ii) Nitisha, a member of her father’s HUF, transferred a house property to the
HUF without consideration. The stamp duty value of the house property is
` 9,00,000.
(iii) Mr. Akshat received 100 shares of A Ltd. from his friend as a gift on occasion
of his 25th marriage anniversary. The fair market value on that date was
` 100 per share. He also received jewellery worth ` 45,000 (FMV) from his
nephew on the same day.
(iv) Kishan HUF gifted a car to son of Karta for achieving good marks in XII board
examination. The fair market value of the car is ` 5,25,000.
3.5 08 INCOME TAX LAW
SOLUTION
Taxable/ Amount Reason
Non- liable to
taxable tax (`)
(i) Taxable 75,000 Sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 received
without consideration from a non-relative is
taxable under section 56(2)(x). Daughter of
Mr. Akhil’s sister is not a relative of Akhil HUF,
since she is not a member of Akhil HUF.
(ii) Non- Nil Immovable property received without
taxable consideration by a HUF from its relative is not
taxable under section 56(2)(x). Since Nitisha is a
member of the HUF, she is a relative of the HUF.
However, income from such asset would be
included in the hands of Nitisha under 64(2).
(iii) Taxable 55,000 As per provisions of section 56(2)(x), in case the
aggregate fair market value of property, other
than immovable property, received without
consideration exceeds ` 50,000, the whole of the
aggregate value shall be taxable. In this case, the
aggregate fair market value of shares (` 10,000)
and jewellery (` 45,000) exceeds ` 50,000. Hence,
the entire amount of ` 55,000 shall be taxable.
(iv) Non- Nil Car is not included in the definition of property
taxable for the purpose of section 56(2)(x), therefore, the
same shall not be taxable.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. Hari, a property dealer, sold a building in the course of his business to his friend
Mr. Rajesh, who is a dealer in automobile spare parts, for ` 90 lakh on 1.1.2025
when the stamp duty value was ` 150 lakh. The agreement was, however, entered
into on 1.9.2024 when the stamp duty value was ` 140 lakh. Mr. Hari had received
a down payment of ` 15 lakh by a crossed cheque from Rajesh on the date of
agreement. Discuss the tax implications in the hands of Hari and Rajesh, assuming
that Mr. Hari has purchased the building for ` 75 lakh on 12th July, 2023.
Would your answer be different if Hari was a share broker instead of a property
dealer?
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 09
SOLUTION
Case 1: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a property dealer
In the hands of the seller, Mr. Hari In the hands of the buyer,
Mr. Rajesh
In the hands of Hari, the provisions of Since Mr. Rajesh is a dealer in
section 43CA would be attracted, since automobile spare parts, the building
the building represents his stock-in- purchased would be a capital asset
trade and he has transferred the same in his hands. The provisions of
for a consideration less than the stamp section 56(2)(x) would be attracted
duty value; and the stamp duty value in the hands of Mr. Rajesh who has
exceeds 110% of consideration. received immovable property, being
Under section 43CA, the option to a capital asset, for inadequate
adopt the stamp duty value on the date consideration and the difference
of agreement can be exercised only if between the consideration and
whole or part of the consideration has stamp duty value exceeds
been received on or before the date of ` 9,00,000, being the higher of
agreement by way of account payee ` 50,000 and 10% of consideration.
cheque or draft or by use of ECS Therefore, ` 60 lakh, being the
through a bank account or through difference between the stamp duty
credit card, debit card, net banking, value of the property on the date of
IMPS (Immediate payment Service), UPI registration (i.e., ` 150 lakh) and the
(Unified Payment Interface), RTGS (Real actual consideration (i.e., ` 90 lakh)
Time Gross Settlement), NEFT (National would be taxable under section
Electronic Funds Transfer), and BHIM 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mr. Rajesh,
(Bharat Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay since the payment on the date of
on or before the date of agreement. In agreement is made by crossed
this case, since the down payment of cheque and not account payee
` 15 lakh is received on the date of cheque/draft or ECS or through
agreement by crossed cheque and not credit card, debit card, net banking,
account payee cheque, the option IMPS (Immediate payment Service),
cannot be exercised. UPI (Unified Payment Interface),
Therefore, ` 75 lakh, being the RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement),
difference between the stamp duty NEFT (National Electronic Funds
value on the date of transfer i.e., Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat
` 150 lakh, and the purchase price i.e., Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay.
` 75 lakh, would be chargeable as
business income in the hands of
Mr. Hari, since stamp duty value
exceeds 110% of the consideration
3.5 10 INCOME TAX LAW
Case 2: Tax implications if Mr. Hari is a share broker
In the hands of the seller, Mr. Hari In the hands of the buyer,
Mr. Rajesh
In case Mr. Hari is a share broker and not There would be no difference in
a property dealer, the building would the taxability in the hands of
represent his capital asset and not stock- Mr. Rajesh, whether Mr. Hari is a
in-trade. In such a case, the provisions of property dealer or a stock broker.
section 50C would be attracted in the Therefore, the provisions of
hands of Mr. Hari, since building is section 56(2)(x) would be attracted
transferred for a consideration less than in the hands of Mr. Rajesh who has
the stamp duty value; and the stamp duty received immovable property,
value exceeds 110% of consideration. being a capital asset, for
Thus, ` 75 lakh, being the difference inadequate consideration and the
between the stamp duty value on the difference between the
date of registration (i.e., ` 150 lakh) consideration and stamp duty
and the purchase price (i.e., ` 75 lakh) value exceeds ` 9,00,000, being
would be chargeable as short-term the higher of ` 50,000 and 10% of
capital gains. consideration.
It may be noted that under section 50C, Therefore, ` 60 lakh, being the
the option to adopt the stamp duty difference between the stamp
value on the date of agreement can be duty value of the property on the
exercised only if whole or part of the date of registration (i.e., ` 150
consideration has been received on or lakh) and the actual consideration
before the date of agreement by way of (i.e., ` 90 lakh) would be taxable
account payee cheque or draft or by use under section 56(2)(x) in the
of ECS through a bank account or hands of Mr. Rajesh, since the
through credit card, debit card, net payment on the date of
banking, IMPS (Immediate payment agreement is made by crossed
Service), UPI (Unified Payment Interface), cheque and not account payee
RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement), NEFT cheque/draft or ECS or through
(National Electronic Funds Transfer), and credit card, debit card, net
BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money) banking, IMPS (Immediate
Aadhar Pay on or before the date of payment Service), UPI (Unified
agreement. In this case, since the down Payment Interface), RTGS (Real
payment of ` 15 lakhs has been received Time Gross Settlement), NEFT
on the date of agreement by crossed (National Electronic Funds
cheque and not account payee cheque, Transfer), and BHIM (Bharat
the option cannot be exercised. Interface for Money) Aadhar Pay.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 11
(6) Compensation or any other payment received in connection with
termination of his employment [Section 56(2)(xi)]
Any compensation or any other payment, due to or received by any person,
by whatever name called, in connection with the termination of his
employment or the modification of the terms and conditions relating
thereto shall be chargeable to tax under this head.
(7) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus, under a
LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy, which is not
exempt u/s 10(10D) [Section 56(2)(xii)]
Any sum received under a life insurance policy, including the sum allocated
by way of bonus on such policy would not be included in the total income
of a person [Section 10(10D)].
The following table summarizes the exemption available under section
10(10D) vis-a-vis the date of issue of such policies and the corresponding
condition to be satisfied for exemption -
Exemption u/s 10(10D)
In respect of Any sum received under a LIP including the sum
policies issued allocated by way of bonus is exempt.
before 1.4.2003
In respect of Any sum received under a LIP including the sum allocated
policies issued by way of bonus is exempt.
between However, exemption would not be available if the
1.4.2003 and premium payable for any of the years during the term of
31.3.2012 the policy exceeds 20% of “actual capital sum assured”.
In respect of Any sum received under a LIP including the sum
policies issued allocated by way of bonus is exempt.
on or after However, exemption would not be available if the
1.4.2012 but premium payable for any of the years during the term of
before 1.4.2013 the policy exceeds 10% of actual capital sum assured.
In respect of (a) Where the insurance is on the life of a person
policies issued with disability or severe disability as referred to
on or after in section 80U or a person suffering from disease
1.4.2013 or ailment as specified under section 80DDB.
Any sum received under a LIP including the sum
allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However,
3.5 12 INCOME TAX LAW
exemption would not be available if the premium
payable for any of the years during the term of
the policy exceeds 15% of “actual capital sum
assured”
(b) Where the insurance is on the life of any
person, other than mentioned in (a) above
Any sum received under a LIP including the sum
allocated by way of bonus is exempt. However,
exemption would not be available if the premium
payable for any of the years during the term of the
policy exceeds 10% of “actual capital sum
assured”.
In respect of Any sum received under a LIP including the sum
policies issued allocated by way of bonus is exempt.
on or after However, exemption would not be available if the
1.4.2023 premium payable for any of the years during the term of
the policy exceeds 10% or 15%, as the case may be, of
“actual capital sum assured.
Further, exemption would also not be available if the
amount of premium payable exceeds ` 5,00,000 for any
of the previous years during the term of such policy.
In a case where premium is payable by a person for
more than one LIP (other than ULIP) and the aggregate
of premium payable on such policies exceed ` 5,00,000
for any of the previous years during the term of any
such policy(ies), exemption would be available in
respect of any of those LIPs (other than ULIP), at the
option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium
payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the
previous years during their term.
Any sum is received on the death of a person is exempt irrespective of the
annual premium payable on the policy. The condition of payment of
premium of 10% or 15% or 20% or ` 5,00,000 would not be applicable.
Exemption is not available in respect of amount received from an
insurance policy taken for disabled person under section 80DD: Any
sum received under section 80DD(3) shall not be exempt under section
10(10D). Accordingly, if the dependent disabled, in respect of whom an
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 13
individual or the member of the HUF has paid or deposited any amount in
any scheme of LIC or any other insurer, predeceases the individual or the
member of the HUF, the amount so paid or deposited shall be deemed to
be the income of the assessee of the previous year in which such amount is
received. Such amount would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).
Exemption is not available in respect of the sum received under a
Keyman insurance policy: Any sum received under a Keyman insurance
policy shall also not be exempt.
Explanation 1 to section 10(10D) defines “Keyman insurance policy” as a life
insurance policy taken by one person on the life of another person who is or
was the employee of the first-mentioned person or is or was connected in
any manner whatsoever with the business of the first-mentioned person.
The term includes within its scope a keyman insurance policy which has
been assigned to any person during its term, with or without consideration.
Therefore, such policies shall continue to be treated as a keyman insurance
policy even after the same is assigned to the keyman. Consequently, the
sum received by the keyman on such policies, being “keyman insurance
policies”, would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).
Guidelines u/s 10(10D) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 [Circular No.
15/2023 dated 16.08.2023]
Section 10(10D) provides for exemption of the sum received under a life
insurance policy, including the sum allocated by way of bonus on such
policy subject to the condition that the annual premium does not exceed
10% of actual capital sum assured.
W.e.f. A.Y. 2024-25, section 10(10D) amended by the Finance Act, 2023 to
provide that -
(I) In case where an assessee has a single life insurance policy (other
than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - Exemption u/s 10(10D)
would not be available with respect to any life insurance policy (other
than ULIP) issued on or after 1.4.2023, if the amount of premium
payable exceeds ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the
term of such life insurance policy.
(II) In case where an assessee has multiple life insurance policies
(other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 - In a case where
3.5 14 INCOME TAX LAW
premium is payable by a person for more than one life insurance
policies (other than ULIPs) issued on or after 1.4.2023 and the
aggregate of premium payable on such life insurance policies exceed
` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of any such
LIP(s), exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available in respect of any of
those LIPs, at the option of the assessee, whose aggregate premium
payable does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years
during their term. However, to get exemption u/s 10(10D), the
condition of annual premium not exceeding 10% of the actual capital
sum assured also needs to be satisfied.
(III) Exemption in case of death of a person - In case any sum is received
on the death of a person, exemption u/s 10(10D) would be available
irrespective of the annual premium payable of the LIP.
Guidelines issued by the CBDT: In case any difficulty arises in giving effect
to the provisions of this clause, the CBDT may issue guidelines for the
purpose of removing the difficulty with the previous approval of the Central
Government.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, with the approval of the Central Government, vide
this circular, issued the following guidelines in respect of LIPs (other than
ULIPs)–
Situation 1: No sum of any nature including bonus (such sum hereinafter
referred as “consideration”) is received by the assessee on any LIPs which
are issued on or after 1.4.2023 (such LIPs hereinafter referred as “eligible
LIPs”) during any previous year preceding the current previous year (being
the P.Y. in which consideration is received and its taxability is being
examined) or consideration has been received on such eligible LIPs in an
earlier previous year but has not been claimed exempt. In such a situation,
the exemption u/s 10(10D) would be determined as under:
I. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current
P.Y., under one eligible LIP only
Circumstance Eligibility for exemption u/s
10(10D)
If the amount of premium Such consideration would be
payable on such eligible LIP eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
does not exceed ` 5,00,000
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 15
for any of the PYs during the [Refer Example 1 and 2 given
term of such eligible LIP and below]
annual premium does not
exceed 10% of actual capital
sum assured
If the amount of premium Such consideration would not be
payable on such eligible LIP > eligible for exemption u/s 10(10D).
` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs [Refer Example 3 given below]
during the term of such
eligible LIP
Example 1:
LIP A
Date of issue 1.4.2013
Annual premium 6,00,000
Sum assured 60,00,000
Consideration received as on 01.11.2023 on maturity 70,00,000
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2024-25.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received
under LIP “A” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2025-26 since
annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum
assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit
of ` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable is not applicable, since it
is not an eligible LIP.
Example 2:
LIP A
Date of issue 1.4.2023
Annual premium 5,00,000
Sum assured 50,00,000
Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity 52,00,000
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
3.5 16 INCOME TAX LAW
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received
would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since the annual
premium payable on the policy does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also
does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
Example 3:
LIP A
Date of issue 1.4.2023
Annual premium 6,00,000
Sum assured 60,00,000
Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on maturity 70,00,000
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received
would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 since the annual
premium payable on the eligible LIP exceeds ` 5,00,000.
II. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current
P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP
Circumstance Eligibility for exemption u/s
10(10D)
If the aggregate of the amount Such consideration would be
of premium payable on such eligible for exemption under u/s
eligible LIPs does not exceed 10(10D).
` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs
[Refer Example 4 given below]
during the term of such eligible
LIPs and the annual premium ≤
10% of actual capital sum
assured
If the aggregate of the amount Consideration in respect of any of
of premium payable on such those eligible LIPs whose
eligible LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for any aggregate amount of premium
of the PYs during the term of payable does not exceed
such eligible LIP ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs
during their term would be
eligible for exemption
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 17
u/s 10(10D), provided their annual
premium ≤ 10% of actual capital
sum assured.
[Refer Examples 5, 6 and 7
given below]
Example 4:
LIP A B
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2023
Annual premium 3,00,000 2,00,000
Sum assured 30,00,000 20,00,000
Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on 32,00,000 21,00,000
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of
the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” does not exceed
` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
Further, annual premium payable in respect of LIP “A” and LIP “B” does
not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured. Therefore, the
consideration received under LIP “A” and “B” would be exempt u/s
10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35
Example 5:
LIP A B
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2023
Annual premium 4,50,000 5,50,000
Sum assured 45,00,000 55,00,000
Consideration received as on 01.11.2033 on 52,00,000 60,00,000
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) – In this case, the aggregate of
the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and LIP “B” exceeds ` 5,00,000
during the term of these policies.
3.5 18 INCOME TAX LAW
However, the consideration received under LIP “A” would be exempt
u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since its annual premium payable does
not exceed ` 5,00,000 for any previous year during the term of the
policy and also does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum assured.
Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “B” alone would
not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.
Example 6:
LIP A B C
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2023 1.4.2023
Annual premium 1,00,000 3,50,000 6,00,000
Sum assured 10,00,000 35,00,000 60,00,000
Consideration received as 12,00,000 40,00,000 70,00,000
on 01.11.2033 on maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The aggregate of annual
premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” exceeds ` 5,00,000
during the term of these policies.
However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be
exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual
premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for
any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual
premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of
actual capital sum assured.
Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would
not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.
Example 7:
LIP X A B C
Date of issue 1.4.2022 1.4.2023 1.4.2023 1.4.2023
Annual premium 5,50,000 1,00,000 3,50,000 6,00,000
Sum assured 55,00,000 10,00,000 35,00,000 60,00,000
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 19
Consideration 62,00,000
received as on
01.11.2032 on
maturity
Consideration 12,00,000 40,00,000 70,00,000
received as on
01.11.2033 on
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2033-34, except
LIP X in P.Y. 2032-33.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration received
under LIP “X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2032-33, since
annual premium does not exceed 10% of the actual capital sum
assured. Moreover, as the policy has been issued before 1.4.2023, limit
of ` 5,00,000 on amount of premium payable is not applicable, since
LIP “X” is not an eligible LIP.
The aggregate of annual premium payable for LIP “A”, LIP “B” and LIP
“C” (being LIPs issued on or after 1.4.2023) exceeds ` 5,00,000 during
the term of these policies.
However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” and “B” would be
exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35, since aggregate of annual
premium payable for these two policies does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for
any previous year during the term of these two policies and annual
premium payable in respect of these policies does not exceed 10% of
actual capital sum assured.
Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “C” alone would
not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35.
Situation 2: Consideration has been received by the assessee under any
one or more eligible LIPs (i.e., issued on or after 1.4.2023) during any P.Y.
preceding the current P.Y. and it has been claimed to be exempt u/s
10(10D). Such eligible LIPs are referred as “Earlier Exempt Eligible LIPs (EEE
LIPs)” in this paragraph and corresponding examples and reference to
eligible LIPs shall not include EEE LIPs. The exemption u/s 10(10D) would be
determined as under:
3.5 20 INCOME TAX LAW
I. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current
P.Y., under one eligible LIP only
Circumstance Eligibility for
exemption u/s 10(10D)
If aggregate amount of premium payable Consideration under
on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs does not such eligible LIP would
exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs be eligible for
during the term of such eligible LIP and exemption u/s 10(10D).
annual premium in respect of eligible LIP
does not exceed 10% of actual capital sum
assured.
If aggregate amount of premium payable Consideration under
on such eligible LIP and EEE LIPs > ` such eligible LIP would
5,00,000 for any of the PYs during the not be eligible for
term of such eligible LIP exemption u/s 10(10D).
II. Where the assessee has received consideration, during the current
P.Y., under more than one eligible LIP
Circumstance Eligibility for exemption u/s
10(10D)
If aggregate of the amount of Consideration received would
premium payable on such eligible be eligible for exemption
LIPs and EEE LIPs does not exceed under u/s 10(10D).
` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs during
the term of such eligible LIPs and
annual premium in respect of
eligible LIPs also does not exceed
10% of actual capital sum assured.
If aggregate of the amount of Consideration in respect of any
premium payable on such eligible of those eligible LIPs (whose
LIPs and EEE LIPs > ` 5,00,000 for aggregate amount of premium
any of the PYs during the term of along with the aggregate
such eligible LIPs amount of premium of EEE LIPs
does not exceed ` 5,00,000 for
any of the PYs during their
term) would be eligible for
exemption u/s 10(10D).
[Refer Examples 8, 9 and 10
given below]
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 21
Example 8:
LIP X A B C
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2024 1.4.2024 1.4.2024
Annual premium 4,50,000 1,00,000 1,50,000 6,00,000
Sum assured 45,00,000 10,00,000 15,00,000 60,00,000
Consideration received 50,00,000
as on 01.11.2033 on
maturity
Consideration received 12,00,000 18,00,000 70,00,000
as on 01.11.2034 on
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except LIP
X in P.Y. 2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP
“X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual
premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of
actual capital sum assured.
In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”,
LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds
` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
The aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A” and the
premium for LIP “X” also exceeds ` 5,00,000 during the term of these
policies.
Consequently, the consideration received under LIP “A”, LIP “B” and
LIP “C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36.
Example 9:
LIP X A B C
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2024 1.4.2024 1.4.2024
Annual premium 2,50,000 2,00,000 2,50,000 6,00,000
Sum assured 25,00,000 20,00,000 25,00,000 60,00,000
Consideration 30,00,000
received as on
3.5 22 INCOME TAX LAW
01.11.2033 on
maturity
Consideration 24,00,000 38,00,000 70,00,000
received as on
01.11.2034 on
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2034-35, except
LIP X in P.Y. 2033-34.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP
“X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in P.Y. 2033-34, since the annual
premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of
actual capital sum assured.
In this case, the aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “A”,
LIP “B” and LIP “C” along with the premium for LIP “X” exceeds
` 5,00,000 during the term of these policies.
However, the consideration received under LIPs “A” or “B” (any one)
can be claimed as exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36.
If the consideration received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt as
aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “A” did not
exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under
LIP “B” would not be exempt.
If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as
aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “X” and “B” did not
exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under
LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received
under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.
Alternative treatment: If the consideration under LIP “X” was not
claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the assessee,
then, the consideration received under LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be
exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36 since the aggregate of the annual
premium payable for the LIPs “A” and “B” together did not exceed
` 5,00,000 for any of the previous years during the term of these two
policies. However, the most beneficial treatment is to claim LIP “X” and
“B” as exempt.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 23
It may be noted that in every case, the consideration received for LIP
“C” would not be exempt u/s 10(10D).
Example 10:
LIP X Y A B C
Date of issue 1.4.2023 1.4.2023 1.4.2024 1.4.2024 1.4.2024
Annual 2,00,000 2,00,000 2,00,000 3,00,000 6,00,000
premium
Sum assured 20,00,000 20,00,000 20,00,000 30,00,000 60,00,000
Consideration 12,00,000
received on
surrender as
on 1.7.2033
Consideration 24,00,000
received as on
01.11.2034 on
maturity
Consideration 24,00,000 36,00,000 70,00,000
received as on
01.11.2035 on
maturity
Note – The assessee did not receive any consideration under any
other eligible LIPs in earlier P.Y. preceding the P.Y.2035-36, except
LIP “X” and “Y”.
Eligibility for exemption u/s 10(10D) - The consideration under LIP
“X” would be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35, since the annual
premium does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and also does not exceed 10% of
actual capital sum assured.
The consideration received under LIP “Y” would be exempt u/s
10(10D) in A.Y. 2035-36, since the aggregate of annual premium
payable for LIP “X” and “Y” does not exceed ` 5,00,000 and annual
premium payable for LIP “Y” does not exceed 10% of actual capital
sum assured.
The consideration received under LIPs “A”, LIP “B” and LIP “C” would
not be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37, since aggregate of annual
3.5 24 INCOME TAX LAW
premium payable for these three policies and LIP “X” and “Y” exceeds
` 5,00,000.
Alternative treatment: If the consideration on surrender under LIP
“X” was not claimed to be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2034-35 by the
assessee, then the consideration received under LIP “Y” would be
exempt and the consideration received under LIP “A” or LIP “B” (any
one) can be exempt u/s 10(10D) in A.Y. 2036-37. If the consideration
received under LIP “A” is claimed to be exempt, as aggregate of the
annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “A” did not exceed ` 5,00,000
for any of the PYs., the consideration received under LIP “B” would not
be exempt.
If the consideration received under LIP “B” is claimed to be exempt as
aggregate of the annual premium payable for LIP “Y” and “B” did not
exceed ` 5,00,000 for any of the PYs., the consideration received under
LIP “A” would not be exempt. Exemption for consideration received
under LIP “B” is preferred as it is more beneficial to the assessee.
If the consideration on surrender of LIP “X” and on maturity of LIP “Y”
were not claimed to be exempt under section 10(10D) in A.Y.2034-35
and A.Y.2035-36, respectively, then consideration received under both
LIP “A” and LIP “B” would be exempt in A.Y.2036-37 (being LIPs issued
on or after 1.4.2023, whose aggregate consideration does not exceed
` 5,00,000).
It may be noted that, in every case, consideration received under LIP
“C” would not be exempt under section 10(10D).
Clarification on GST Component: It is also clarified by the CBDT that
the premium payable/ aggregate premium payable for a life insurance
policy/policies, other than a ULIP, issued on or after 1.4.2023, for any
previous year, would be exclusive of the amount of GST payable on
such premium.
Clarification on premium of Term life insurance policy: It is further
clarified by the CBDT that the limit of ` 5,00,000 of amount of
premium payable would not be applicable in case of a term life
insurance policy i.e. where sum under a life insurance policy is only
paid to the nominee in case of the death of the person insured during
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 25
the term of the policy and no amount is paid to anyone if the insured
person survives the policy tenure.
Hence, any sum received under a term insurance policy shall continue
to be exempt under section 10(10D), irrespective of the amount of the
premium payable in respect of such policy. Further the premium paid
for such policies would not be counted for checking the limit of
` 5,00,000 of amount of premium payable.
Taxability of sum received under a LIP which is not exempt u/s 10(10D)
Where any sum is received (including the amount allocated by way of bonus) at
any time during a previous year, under a life insurance policy, other than the sum
(i) received under a ULIP
(ii) received under a Keyman insurance policy
which is not exempt under section 10(10D), the sum so received as exceeds
the aggregate of the premium paid during the term of such life insurance
policy, and not claimed as deduction under any other provision of the Act,
computed in the prescribed manner, would be chargeable to tax under the
head “Income from other sources”.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no 61/2023 dated 16.8.2023,
inserted Rule 11UACA to compute the income chargeable to tax under
section 56(2)(xiii). Where any person receives at any time during any
previous year any sum under such LIP, then, the income chargeable to tax
under section 56(2)(xiii) during the previous year in which such sum is
received has to be computed in the following manner –
Situation Income chargeable to tax
during the previous year in
which such sum is received
(i) where the sum is received A-B, where
for the first time under the A = the sum or aggregate of sum
LIP during the previous year received under the LIP during the
(first previous year) first previous year; and
B = the aggregate of the premium
paid during the term of the LIP till
the date of receipt of the sum in
the first previous year that has not
3.5 26 INCOME TAX LAW
been claimed as deduction under
any other provision of the Act.
(ii) where the sum is received C-D, where
under the LIP during the C = the sum or aggregate of sum
previous year subsequent to received under the LIP during the
the first previous year subsequent previous year; and
(subsequent previous year
D = the aggregate of the
premium paid during the term of
the LIP till the date of receipt of
the sum in the subsequent
previous year not being premium
which –
(a) has been claimed as
deduction under any other
provision of the Act; or
(b) is included in “B” or “D” in any
of the previous year(s).
“Sum received under a LIP” means any amount, by whatever name called,
received under such policy which is not exempt under section 10(10D),
other than the sum –
(a) received under a ULIP; or
(b) received under a Keyman insurance policy
(ii) Income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” only if
not chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession” -
(1) Any sum received by an employer-assessee from his employees as
contributions to any provident fund, superannuation fund or any other
fund for the welfare of the employees
(2) Income from letting out on hire, machinery, plant or furniture.
(3) Where letting out of buildings is inseparable from the letting out of
machinery, plant or furniture, the income from such letting.
(4) Interest on securities
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 27
However, certain interest income arising to certain persons would
be exempt under section 10(15), for example,:
(i) Income by way of interest, premium on redemption or other
payment on notified securities, bonds, annuity certificates or
other savings certificates is exempt subject to such conditions
and limits as may be specified in the notification.
It may be noted that interest on Post Office Savings Bank
Account which was so far fully exempt would henceforth be
exempt from tax for any assessment year only to the extent of:
(1) ` 3,500 in case of an individual account.
(2) ` 7,000 in case of a joint account.
(ii) Interest on Gold Deposit Bond issued under the Gold Deposit
Scheme, 1999 or deposit certificates issued under the Gold
Monetization Scheme, 2015 notified by the Central Government.
(iii) Interest on bonds, issued by –
(a) a local authority; or
(b) a State Pooled Finance Entity
and specified by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette.
“State Pooled Finance Entity” means such entity which is set
up in accordance with the guidelines for the Pooled Finance
Development Scheme notified by the Central Government in the
Ministry of Urban Development.
(iii) Keyman Insurance Policy
Any sum received under a Keyman insurance policy including the sum allocated
by way of bonus on such policy is chargeable under the head “Income from other
sources” if such income is not chargeable under the head “Profits and gains if
business or profession” or under the head “Salaries” i.e. if such sum is received by
any person other than the employer who took the policy and the employee in
whose name the policy was taken.
3.5 28 INCOME TAX LAW
(iv) Residual Income:
Any income chargeable to tax under the Act, but not falling under any other head
of income shall be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from other sources”.
For example, salary received by an MPs/MLAs will not be chargeable to income-
tax under the head ‘Salary’ but will be chargeable as “Income from other sources”
under section 56. However, the following incomes of Members of Parliament or
State Legislatures will be exempt under section 10(17):
(i) Daily Allowance - Daily allowance received by any Member of Parliament
or of any State Legislatures or any Committee thereof.
(ii) Constituency Allowance of MPs - In the case of a Member of Parliament,
any allowance received under Members of Parliament (Constituency
Allowance) Rules, 1986; and
(iii) Constituency allowance of MLAs - Any constituency allowance received by
any person by reason of his membership of any State Legislature under any
Act or rules made by that State Legislature.
There are other exemptions also in respect of certain incomes which are as
follows:
1. Interest on moneys standing to the credit of individual in his NRE A/c
[Section 10(4)(ii)]
As per section 10(4)(ii), in the case of an individual, any income by way of
interest on moneys standing to his credit in a Non-resident (External)
Account (NRE A/c) in any bank in India in accordance Foreign Exchange
Management Act, 1999 (FEMA, 1999), and the rules made thereunder, would
be exempt, provided such individual;
o is a person resident outside India, as defined in FEMA, 1999, or
o is a person who has been permitted by the Reserve Bank of India to
maintain such account.
In this context, it may be noted that the joint holders of the NRE Account do
not constitute an AOP by merely having these accounts in joint names. The
benefit of exemption under section 10(4)(ii) will be available to such joint
account holders, subject to fulfillment of other conditions contained in that
section by each of the individual joint account holders.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 29
2. Compensation received on account of disaster [Section 10(10BC)]
(i) This clause exempts any amount received or receivable as compensation
by an individual or his legal heir on account of any disaster.
(ii) Such compensation should be granted by the Central Government or
a State Government or a local authority.
(iii) However, exemption would not be available in respect of
compensation for alleviating any damage or loss, which has already
been allowed as deduction under the Act.
(iv) "Disaster" means a catastrophe, mishap, calamity or grave occurrence
in any area, arising from natural or manmade causes, or by accident or
negligence. It should have the effect of causing -
(1) substantial loss of life or human suffering; or
(2) damage to, and destruction of, property; or
(3) damage to, or degradation of, environment.
It should be of such a nature or magnitude as to be beyond the
coping capacity of the community of the affected area.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Compensation on account of disaster received from a local authority by an
individual or his/her legal heir is taxable. Examine the correctness of the
statement with reference to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
SOLUTION
The statement is not correct. As per section 10(10BC), any amount received
or receivable as compensation by an individual or his/her legal heir on
account of any disaster from the Central Government, State Government or
a local authority is exempt from tax. However, the exemption is not
available to the extent such individual or legal heir has already been allowed
a deduction under this Act on account of such loss or damage caused by
such disaster.
3.5 30 INCOME TAX LAW
3. Educational scholarships [Section 10(16)]
The value of scholarship granted to meet the cost of education would be
exempt from tax in the hands of the recipient irrespective of the amount or
source of scholarship.
4. Awards for literary, scientific and artistic works and other awards by
the Government [Section 10(17A)]
Any award instituted in the public interest by the Central/State Government
or by any other body approved by the Central Government and a reward by
Central/State Government for such purposes as may be approved by the
Central Government in public interest, will enjoy exemption under this clause.
5. Payment in commutation of pension received from a set up by LIC
[Section 10(10A)]
Any commuted pension received by an individual from a fund set up by LIC of
India, approved by Controller of Insurance or IRDA of India will be exempted.
Interest from non-SLR Securities of Banks: Whether chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession” or “Income from other
sources”? [Circular No. 18, dated 2.11.2015]
The issue addressed by this circular is whether in the case of banks, expenses
relatable to investment in non-SLR securities need to be disallowed under section
57(i), by considering interest on non-SLR securities as “Income from other
sources."
Section 56(1)(id) provides that income by way of interest on securities shall be
chargeable to income-tax under the head "Income from Other Sources", if the
income is not chargeable to income-tax under the head "Profits and Gains of
Business and Profession".
The CBDT clarified that the investments made by a banking concern are part of
the business of banking. Therefore, the income arising from such investments is
attributable to the business of banking falling under the head "Profits and Gains
of Business and Profession".
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 31
5.4 APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF
CASUAL INCOME OTHER THAN WINNINGS
FROM ANY ONLINE GAME [SECTION 115BB]
(i) This section provides that income by way of winnings from lotteries,
crossword puzzles, races including horse races or card games and other
games of any sort or from gambling or betting of any form would be taxed
at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and education
cess@4%.
However, income by way of winnings from any online game would not be
taxed under this section.
(ii) No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
(iii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
(iv) Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted
against such income.
5.5 APPLICABLE RATE OF TAX IN RESPECT OF
WINNINGS FROM ONLINE GAMES
[SECTION 115BBJ]
(i) This section provides that net winnings from any online game would be
taxed at a flat rate of 30% plus surcharge, if applicable, plus health and
education cess@4%.
(ii) Meaning of online games: A game that is offered on the internet and is
accessible by a user through a computer resource including any
telecommunication device
(iii) No expenditure or allowance can be allowed from such income.
(iv) Deduction under Chapter VI-A is not allowable from such income.
(v) Adjustment of unexhausted basic exemption limit is also not permitted
against such income.
3.5 32 INCOME TAX LAW
5.6 DEDUCTIONS ALLOWABLE [SECTION 57]
The income chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” shall be
computed after making the following deductions:
(i) In the case of dividend (other than deemed dividend arise on account of
buy-back of shares by a domestic company) or income in respect of units of
a mutual fund9 or income in respect of units of a specified company10 :
Interest expenditure to earn such income is allowed as deduction subject to
a maximum of 20% of such income included in the total income, without
deduction under this section.
No deduction in respect of any expenditure is allowed in case of deemed
dividend arise on account of buy-back of shares by a domestic company.
(ii) In the case of interest on securities: Any reasonable sum paid by way of
commission or remuneration to a banker or any other person for the
purpose of realising such interest on behalf of the assessee.
(iii) Income consists of recovery from employees as contribution to any
provident fund etc. in terms of section 2(24)(x): A deduction will be
allowed in accordance with the provisions of section 36(1)(va) i.e., to the
extent the contribution is remitted before the due date under the respective
Acts.
(iv) Where the income to be charged under this head is from letting on hire
of machinery, plant and furniture, with or without building: The
following items of deductions are allowable in the computation of such
income:
(a) the amount paid on account of any current repairs to the machinery,
plant, furniture or building.
(b) the amount of any premium paid in respect of insurance against risk
of damage or destruction of the machinery or plant, furniture or
building.
(c) the normal depreciation allowance in respect of the machinery, plant
or furniture, due thereon.
9 Specified u/s 10(23D)
10 Defined in the Explanation to section 10(35)
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 33
(v) In the case of income in the nature of family pension: A deduction of a
sum equal to 33-1/3 per cent of such income or ` 15,000 (in case of option
regime) or ` 25,000 (in case of default regime), whichever is less, is
allowable.
For the purposes of this deduction, “family pension” means a regular
monthly amount payable by the employer to a person belonging to the
family of an employee in the event of his death.
Exemption in respect of family pension
1. The family pension received by the widow or children or nominated
heirs, of a member of the armed forces (including para-military
forces) of the Union, where the death of such member has occurred in
the course of operational duties, in specified circumstances would,
however, be exempt under section 10(19).
2. The family pension received by any member of the family of an individual
who had been in the service of Central or State Government and had
been awarded “Param Vir Chakra” or “Maha Vir Chakra” or “Vir Chakra” or
other notified gallantry awards would be exempt u/s 10(18)(ii).
(vi) Any other expenditure not being in the nature of capital expenditure
laid out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purpose of making or
earning such income.
(vii) In case of income by way of interest on compensation/ enhanced
compensation received chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(viii):
Deduction of 50% of such income. No deduction would be allowable under
any other clause of section 57 in respect of such income.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Interest on enhanced compensation received by Mr. G during the previous year
2024-25 is ` 5,00,000. Out of this interest, ` 1,50,000 relates to the previous year
2020-21, ` 1,65,000 relates to previous year 2021-22 and ` 1,85,000 relates to
previous year 2022-23. Discuss the tax implication, if any, of such interest income
for A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
The entire interest of ` 5,00,000 would be taxable in the year of receipt, namely,
P.Y. 2024-25.
3.5 34 INCOME TAX LAW
`
Particulars
Interest on enhanced compensation taxable u/s 56(2)(viii) 5,00,000
Less: Deduction under section 57(iv) @50% 2,50,000
Interest chargeable under the head “Income from other sources” 2,50,000
5.7 DEDUCTIONS NOT ALLOWABLE [SECTION 58]
No deduction shall be made in computing the “Income from other sources” of an
assessee in respect of the following items of expenses:
(i) In the case of any assessee:
(1) any personal expense of the assessee;
(2) any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside
India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
(3) any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable
outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source.
(ii) Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related
person: In addition to these disallowances, section 58(2) specifically
provides that the disallowance of any expenditure in respect of which a
payment is made to a related person, to the extent the same is considered
excessive or unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the
FMV and disallowance of payment or aggregate of payments exceeding
` 10,000 or ` 35,000, as the case may be, made to a person during a day
otherwise than by account payee cheque or draft or ECS through bank
account or through such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit
card, debit card, net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay
covered by section 40A will be applicable to the computation of income
under the head ‘Income from other sources’ as well.
(iii) Disallowance of 30% of expenditure: 30% of expenditure shall not be
allowed, in respect of a sum which is payable to a resident and on which tax
is deductible at source, if
• such tax has not been deducted or;
• such tax after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date
of return specified in section 139(1).
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 35
In case, assessee fails to deduct the whole or any part of tax on any such
sum but is not deemed as assessee in default under the first proviso to
section 201(1) by reason that such payee –
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return
of income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of
income, and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an
accountant in such form as may be prescribed,
it would be deemed that the assessee has deducted and paid the tax on
such sum.
The date of deduction and payment of taxes by the payer shall be deemed
to be the date on which return of income has been furnished by the payee.
(iv) No deduction in respect of any expenditure incurred in connection with
casual income: No deduction in respect of any expenditure or allowance in
connection with income by way of earnings from lotteries, cross word
puzzles, races including horse races, card games and other games of any
sort or from gambling or betting of any form or nature whatsoever shall be
allowed in computing the said income.
The prohibition will not, however, apply in respect of the income of an
assessee, being the owner of race horses, from the activity of owning and
maintaining such horses. In respect of the activity of owning and
maintaining race horses, expenses incurred shall be allowed even in the
absence of any stake money earned. Such loss shall be allowed to be
carried forward in accordance with the provisions of section 74A.
5.8 DEEMED INCOME CHARGEABLE TO TAX
[SECTION 59]
The provisions of section 41(1) are made applicable, so far as may be, to the
computation of income under this head. Accordingly, where a deduction has been
made in respect of a loss, expenditure or liability and subsequently any amount is
received or benefit is derived in respect of such expenditure incurred or loss or
trading liability allowed as deduction, then, it shall be deemed as income in the
year in which the amount is received or the benefit is accrued.
3.5 36 INCOME TAX LAW
LET US RECAPITULATE
Where any income, profits or gains includible in the total income of an assessee,
cannot be included under any of the other heads, it would be chargeable under
the head ‘Income from other sources’. Hence, this head is the residuary head of
income [Section 56(1)]
Specific Incomes Chargeable under this head [Section 56(2)]
(1) Dividend Income
(2) Casual income (winnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including
horse races, card games and other games, gambling, betting etc.). Such
winnings are chargeable to tax at a flat rate of 30% under section 115BB and
in case of online games, net winnings therefrom is chargeable to tax @30%
u/s 115BBJ and no expenditure or deduction under Chapter VIA can be
allowed from such income. No loss can be set-off against such income and
even the unexhausted basic exemption limit cannot be exhausted against
such income.
(3) Sum of money or property received by any person [Section 56(2)(x)]
Nature of Particulars Taxable value
asset
1 Money Without The whole amount, if the same exceeds
consideration ` 50,000.
2 Movable Without The aggregate fair market value of the
property consideration property, if it exceeds ` 50,000.
3 Movable Inadequate The difference between the aggregate fair
property consideration market value and the consideration, if
such difference exceeds ` 50,000.
4 Immovable Without The stamp value of the property, if it
property consideration exceeds ` 50,000.
5 Immovable Inadequate The difference between the stamp duty
property consideration value and the consideration, if such
difference exceeds the higher of
` 50,000 and 10% of consideration.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 37
Receipts exempted from the applicability of section 56(2)(x)
Any sum of money or value of property received -
(a) from any relative; or
(b) on the occasion of the marriage of the individual; or
(c) under a will or by way of inheritance; or
(d) in contemplation of death of the payer or donor, as the case may be; or
(e) from any local authority; or
(f) from any fund or university or other educational institution or hospital
or other medical institution or any trust or institution; or
(g) from or by any registered trust or institution
(h) by any fund or trust or institution or any university or other educational
institution or any hospital or other medical institution.
(i) by way of transaction not regarded as transfer under specified clauses
of section 47
(j) from an individual by a trust created or established solely for the benefit
of relative of the individual.
(k) from such class of persons and subject to such conditions, as may be
prescribed.
(l) by an individual, from any person, in respect of any expenditure actually
incurred by him on his medical treatment or treatment of any member
of his family, for any illness related to COVID-19 subject to conditions
notified by the Central Government
(m) by a member of the family of a deceased person -
(A) from the employer of the deceased person (without any limit); or
(B) from any other person or persons to the extent that such sum or
aggregate of such sums ≤ ` 10 lakhs,
where the cause of death of such person is illness related to COVID-19
and the payment is—
(i) received within 12 months from the date of death of such person;
and
(ii) subject to such other conditions notified by the Central
Government.
3.5 38 INCOME TAX LAW
(4) Other receipts chargeable under this head
Section Provision
56(2)(viii) Interest received on compensation/enhanced compensation
deemed to be income in the year of receipt and taxable under the
head “Income from Other Sources”.
56(2)(ix) Any sum of money received as an advance or otherwise in the
course of negotiations for transfer of a capital asset, if such sum is
forfeited and the negotiations do not result in transfer of such
asset (in a case where advance is received and forfeited on or
after 1.4.2014).
56(2)(xi) Compensation or other payment, due to or received by any
person, by whatever name called, in connection with termination
of his employment or the modification of the terms and
conditions relating thereto.
56(2)(xii) Sum received, including the amount allocated by way of bonus,
under a LIP other than under a ULIP and keyman insurance policy,
which is not exempt u/s 10(10D).
Exemptions [Section 10]
Section Provision
10(4)(ii) Income by way of interest on moneys standing to his credit in a
Non-resident (External) Account (NRE A/c), is exempt in the
hands of an individual, being a person resident outside India as
per the FEMA, 1999 or in the hands of an individual who has been
permitted by the RBI to maintain such account.
10(10BC) Compensation received or receivable from the Central
Government, State Government or local authority by an individual
or his legal heir on account of any disaster is exempt except to the
extent of loss or damage allowed as deduction under the Act.
10(16) The value of scholarship granted to meet the cost of education
would be exempt from tax in the hands of the recipient
irrespective of the amount or source of scholarship.
10(17) Daily allowance and Constituency allowance received by any
Member of Parliament or of State Legislatures is exempt.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 39
10(17A) Payment, whether in cash or kind, in pursuance of an award
instituted in public interest by the Govt or reward by the Govt. for
approved purposes is exempt.
10(10A) Any commuted pension received by an individual from a fund set
up by LIC of India or any other insurer under a pension scheme,
approved by Controller of Insurance or IRDA of India will be
exempted.
Deductions allowable [Section 57]
S. No. Particulars Deduction
1. In case of dividend (other than Interest expenditure to earn such income.
deemed dividend arise on However, such interest expenses
account of buy-back of shares cannot exceed 20% of such income
by a domestic company) or included in total income, without
income in respect of units of deduction under this section.
mutual fund or income in
respect of units from a
specified company
2. In case of interest on Any reasonable sum paid by way of
securities commission or remuneration to a
banker or any other person.
3. Income consists of recovery Amount of contribution remitted
from employees as before the due date under the
contribution to any PF, respective Acts, in accordance with
superannuation fund etc. the provisions of section 36(1)(va)
4. Income from letting on hire of Current repairs to the machinery,
machinery, plant and furniture, plant, furniture or building,
with or without building insurance premium, depreciation/
unabsorbed depreciation
5. Family Pension Sum equal to
- 33 1/3% of such income or
- ` 15,000 (in case optional
regime) or
- ` 25,000 (in case of default
regime),
whichever is less
3.5 40 INCOME TAX LAW
6. Interest on compensation/ 50% of such interest income
enhanced compensation received
Deductions not allowable [Section 58]
S. No. Deductions not allowable
1. Any personal expense of the assessee
2. Any interest chargeable to tax under the Act which is payable outside
India on which tax has not been paid or deducted at source.
3. Any payment chargeable to tax under the head “Salaries”, if it is payable
outside India unless tax has been paid thereon or deducted at source.
4. Any expenditure in respect of which a payment is made to a related
person, to the extent the same is considered excessive or
unreasonable by the Assessing Officer, having regard to the FMV.
5. Any expenditure in respect of which a payment or aggregate payments
exceeding ` 10,000 is made to a person in a day otherwise than by
account payee cheque or draft or ECS through bank account or through
such other prescribed electronic mode such as credit card, debit card,
net banking, IMPS, UPI, RTGS, NEFT, and BHIM Aadhar Pay.
6. Any expenditure or allowance in connection with income by way of
earnings from lotteries, cross word puzzles, races including horse
races, card games and other games of any sort or from gambling or
betting of any form or nature
7. 30% of expenditure in respect of sum which is payable to a resident on
which tax is deductible at source, if such tax has not been deducted or
after deduction has not been paid on or before the due date of return
specified in section 139(1)
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 41
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Examine under which heads the following incomes are taxable:
(i) Rental income in case property held as stock-in-trade for 3 years
(ii) Salary received by a partner from his partnership firm
(iii) Rental income of machinery
(iv) Winnings from lotteries by a person having the same as business
activity
(v) Salaries received by a Member of Parliament
(vi) Receipts without consideration
(vii) In case of retirement, interest on employee’s contribution if provident
fund is unrecognized.
(viii) Rental income in case of a person engaged in the business of letting out
of commercial properties.
2. Examine whether the following are chargeable to tax and the amount liable
to tax:
(i) A sum of ` 1,20,000 was received as gift from non-relatives by Raj on
the occasion of the marriage of his son Pravin.
(ii) Interest on enhanced compensation of ` 96,000 received on 12-3-2025 for
acquisition of urban land, of which 40% relates to P.Y.2023-24.
3. On 10.10.2024, Mr. Govind (a bank employee) received ` 5,00,000 towards
interest on enhanced compensation from State Government in respect of
compulsory acquisition of his land effected during the financial year 2016-17.
Out of this interest, ` 1,50,000 relates to the financial year 2017-18;
` 1,65,000 to the financial year 2018-19; and ` 1,85,000 to the financial year
2019-20. He incurred ` 50,000 by way of legal expenses to receive the interest
on such enhanced compensation.
How much of interest on enhanced compensation would be chargeable to tax
in the A.Y.2025-26?
3.5 42 INCOME TAX LAW
4. The following details have been furnished by Mrs. Hemali pertaining to the
year ended 31.3.2025:
(i) Cash gift of ` 51,000 received from her friend on the occasion of her
“Shastiaptha Poorthi”, a wedding function celebrated on her husband
completing 60 years of age. This was also her 25th wedding anniversary.
(ii) On the above occasion, a diamond necklace worth ` 2 lacs was
presented by her sister living in Dubai.
(iii) When she celebrated her daughter's wedding on 21.2.2025, her friend
assigned in Mrs. Hemali's favour, a fixed deposit held by the said friend
in a scheduled bank; the value of the fixed deposit and the accrued
interest on the said date was ` 52,000.
Compute the income, if any, assessable as “Income from other sources” for
A.Y.2025-26.
5. Examine the following transactions in the context of Income-tax Act, 1961:
(i) Mr. B transferred 500 shares of R (P) Ltd. to M/s. B Co. (P) Ltd. on
10.10.2024 for ` 3,00,000 when the fair market value was ` 5,00,000.
The indexed cost of acquisition of shares for Mr. B was computed at
` 4,45,000. The transfer was not subjected to securities transaction tax.
Determine the income chargeable to tax in the hands of Mr. B and M/s.
B Co. (P) Ltd. because of the above said transaction.
(ii) Mr. Chezian is employed in a company with taxable salary income of
` 5,00,000. He received a sum of ` 1,00,000 from Atma Charitable Trust
(registered under section 12AB) by account payee cheque in December
2024 for meeting his medical expenses.
Is the sum of money so received from the trust chargeable to tax in the
hands of Mr. Chezian?
ANSWERS
1. Head under which following incomes are taxable:
Particulars Head of Income
(i) Rental income in case property Income from house property
held as stock-in trade for 3 years
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 43
(ii) Salary by partner from his Profits and gains of business or
partnership firm profession
(iii) Rental income of machinery (See Profits and gains of business or
Note below) profession/Income from other
sources
(iv) Winnings from lotteries by a Income from other sources
person having the same as
business activity
(v) Salaries payable to a Member of Income from other sources
Parliament
(vi) Receipts without consideration Income from other sources
(vii) In case of retirement, interest on Income from other sources
employee’s contribution if
provident fund is unrecognized
(viii) Rental income in case of a Profits and gains from business
person engaged in the business or profession
of letting out of commercial
properties
Note - As per section 56(2)(ii), rental income of machinery would be
chargeable to tax under the head “Income from Other Sources”, if the same is
not chargeable to income-tax under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
2. Taxability of Receipts
S. Taxable/ Answer Reason
No. Not Taxable Amount liable
to tax (`)
(i) Taxable 1,20,000 The exemption from applicability of
section 56(2)(x) would be available
if, inter alia, gift is received from a
relative or gift is received on the
occasion of marriage of the
individual himself. In this case, since
gift is received by Mr. Raj from a
non-relative on the occasion of
marriage of his son, it would be
taxable in his hands under section
56(2)(x).
3.5 44 INCOME TAX LAW
(ii) Taxable 48,000 As per section 145B(1), interest
received by the assessee on
enhanced compensation shall be
deemed to be the income of the year
in which it is received, irrespective of
the method of accounting followed
by the assessee.
Interest of ` 96,000 on enhanced
compensation is chargeable to tax
in the year of receipt i.e. P.Y. 2024-
25 under section 56(2)(viii) after
providing deduction of 50% under
section 57(iv). Therefore, ` 48,000
is chargeable to tax under the
head “Income from other sources”.
3. Section 145B provides that interest received by the assessee on enhanced
compensation shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of the year
in which it is received, irrespective of the method of accounting followed by
the assessee and irrespective of the financial year to which it relates.
Section 56(2)(viii) states that such income shall be taxable as ‘Income from
other sources’.
50% of such income shall be allowed as deduction by virtue of section 57(iv)
and no other deduction shall be permissible from such Income.
Therefore, legal expenses incurred to receive the interest on enhanced
compensation would not be allowed as deduction from such income.
Computation of interest on enhanced compensation taxable as “Income
from other sources” for the A.Y 2025-26:
`
Particulars
Interest on enhanced compensation taxable u/s 56(2)(viii) 5,00,000
Less: Deduction under section 57(iv) (50% x ` 5,00,000) 2,50,000
Taxable interest on enhanced compensation 2,50,000
4. (i) Any sum of money received by an individual on the occasion of the
marriage of the individual is exempt. This provision is, however, not
applicable to a cash gift received during a wedding function
celebrated on completion of 60 years of age.
INCOME FROM OTHER SOURCES 3.5 45
The gift of ` 51,000 received from a non-relative is, therefore,
chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mrs. Hemali,
since the same exceeds ` 50,000.
(ii) The provisions of section 56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of any
sum of money or property received from a relative. Thus, the gift of
diamond necklace received from her sister, being a relative, is not
taxable under section 56(2)(x), even though jewellery falls within the
definition of “property”.
(iii) To be exempt from applicability of section 56(2)(x), the property
should be received on the occasion of the marriage of the individual,
not that of the individual’s son or daughter. Therefore, this exemption
provision is not attracted in this case.
Any sum of money received without consideration by an individual is
chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x), if the aggregate value
exceeds ` 50,000 in a year. “Sum of money” has, however, not been
defined under section 56(2)(x).
Therefore, there are two possible views in respect of the value of fixed
deposit assigned in favour of Mrs. Hemali –
(1) The first view is that fixed deposit does not fall within the
meaning of “sum of money” and therefore, the provisions of
section 56(2)(x) are not attracted. It may be noted that fixed
deposit is also not included in the definition of “property”.
(2) However, another possible view is that fixed deposit assigned in
favour of Mrs. Hemali falls within the meaning of “sum of
money” received.
Income assessable as “Income from other sources”
If the first view is taken, the total amount chargeable to tax as “Income
from other sources” would be ` 51,000, being cash gift received from
a friend on her Shastiaptha Poorthi.
As per the second view, the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would also
be attracted in respect of the fixed deposit assigned and the “Income
from other sources” of Mrs. Hemali would be ` 1,03,000 (` 51,000 +
` 52,000).
3.5 46 INCOME TAX LAW
5. (i) Any movable property received for inadequate consideration by any
person is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x), if the difference
between aggregate Fair Market Value of the property and
consideration exceeds ` 50,000.
Thus, share received by M/s B. Co. (P) Ltd. from Mr. B for inadequate
consideration is chargeable to tax under section 56(2)(x) to the extent
of ` 2,00,000.
As per section 50CA, since, the consideration is less than the fair market
value of unquoted shares of R (P) Ltd., fair market value of shares of the
company would be deemed to be the full value of consideration. It is
presumed that the shares of R (P) Ltd are unquoted shares.
The full value of consideration (` 5,00,000) less the indexed cost of
acquisition (` 4,45,000) would result in a long term capital gains of
` 55,000 in the hands of Mr. B.
(ii) The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not apply to any sum of
money or any property received from any trust or institution
registered under section 12AB. Therefore, the sum of ` 1 lakh received
from Atma Charitable Trust, being a trust registered under section
12AB, for meeting medical expenses would not be chargeable to tax
under section 56(2)(x) in the hands of Mr. Chezian.
INCOME OF OTHER
PERSONS INCLUDED
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL
INCOME
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to -
♦ identify when clubbing provisions are attracted and apply the same
in computing total income of the assessee;
♦ examine the circumstances when income of the spouse is included in
the income of the individual and apply the same in computing total
income of the individual;
♦ examine the circumstances when income of son’s wife is included in
the hands of the individual and apply the same in computing total
income of the individual;
♦ identify the nature of income of minor, in respect of which clubbing
provisions are not attracted;
♦ examine how minor’s income is included in the hands of the parent
and compute the amount to be included in the hands of the parent;
♦ examine the circumstances when income of HUF is included in the
hands of a member of the HUF.
RETPAHC
emocni
latot s'eessessa
ni
dedulcni snosrep
rehto
fo emocnI
s'nos fo
emocnI
emocni s'roniM
emocnI s'esuopS
morf gnisira emocnI
emocni
fo
refsnarT
efiw
])A1(46 noitceS[
fo refsnart elbacover
fo
refsnart
tuohtiw
stessa
tessa
]16 noitceS[
]06
noitceS[
a fo emocni llA debbulc si ronim
gnisira emocnI
ot noitarenumeR
fo emocni eht htiw
ro nosrep yna
ot
a morf esuops
r o g tn ei n fm fon d e iei wo is e nto tti us rs aa er r rt sra o rf u beee ' e sh q f se p ds e ns ts em P n i hi oay sdwO a t so n na r A ra oc ft o on co fI
t
g nte en od f si e i ]is e nsw t )tti ur ia a oar vr a o rus e i (n e t )' h qfn ce 1a ds t eem o ( n ii 4m Ssw ds ao n 6[ aroo oc trn t cfI
s tl rn na /sg te geo ui lt ep n uh no i , re t ei t aiat d 0p t m l ffp dbe 0u em ih eos a5 dl tc eo ssalc , ix 1 i exh a hn c fe E hovw rti ` e tae s . f nor xi 'm, fe rt s oe ot )on it p 2 o i a se n td tu 3c p uaer i l ( n m ia hr o of 0hg oip 1c
tn i fo dm e ee ] ie nn )t s tto ius r a oa iuer vr t o ru b ioef e (e t h )qf p css d 1es ts eP e sn (i hia Ssdw 4O a ftn [ 6oa rA rot oc
f
e ed no rn t voe ot a ia r i lg u tr n c oem n q o nef ti es is o an tt tdn ri ar nr n a f a aa r ho e p er e tt mce t ad is u w m u * ni eo sto i eo e nh tp rs oc t o gissn cw na aI
h ] )ac i ii s (h l )a a 1w h ti (t s 4 nn el 6a a ri u et nn sd t or b nie
v iu i tc i csdn
eno Sic
[
tf oo gn ny] i2 sa rn i u6 w o h d ni cy t eio bp h lie b wt rc aec x ce f tE s s oS n u v[ a r etr
r T a
noitceS[
])vi()1(46 noitceS[
eht fo emit efil eht
dedivorp emiger xat
])iiiv()1(46
ni ro yraicifeneb
noitces rednu
noitpecxE
rehto yna fo esac
.)A1(CAB511
ton ,refsnart gnirud elbacover eht fo emitefil eht eerefsnart
snoitpecxE
esuops erehW
ro
tcerid on sevired rorefsnarT
sessessop
emocni
hcus morf tifeneb
tceridni
ro lacinhcet lanoisseforp
a fo emocnI
morf emocnI
,snoitacifilauq
dlihc ronim
ro krow launam
gnibbulc
ot rewop nehw dna
sA
morf gnireffus
tnelat ,lliks
morf
lliw snoisivorp
gnibbulc ,sesira ekover
ytilibasid
desilaiceps
ro
ylppa ton
ylppa dluow snoisivorp
s/u denoitnem
ro egdelwonk
eb ton llahs
U08 lliw ecneirepxe
,noitaredisnoc
etauqeda
tuohtiw
esuops
ot
ytreporp
esuoh fo
refsnart
fo
esac
nI
*
debbulc
debbulc eb
ton
,esac
a
hcus nI .)i(72 noitces
rep sa ytreporp
hcus
fo renwo sa demeed
eb
lliw
rorefsnart
.ylppa ton
lliw
)vi()1(46
noitces
4.2 INCOME TAX LAW
4.3
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
1. CLUBBING OF INCOME – AN INTRODUCTION
Under the Income-tax Act, 1961, an assessee is generally taxed in respect of his
own income. However, there are certain cases where an assessee has to pay tax in
respect of income of another person. The provisions for the same are contained in
sections 60 to 64 of the Act. These provisions have been enacted to counteract
the tendency on the part of the tax-payers to dispose of their property or transfer
their income in such a way that their tax liability can be avoided or reduced.
These provisions can be categorized as follows:
• Income of other persons included in an assessee’s total income [Sections 60-63]
• Income of other persons included in an Individual’s total income [Section 64]
Note - In the case of individuals, income-tax is levied on a slab system on the total
income. The tax system is progressive i.e. as the income increases, the applicable rate
of tax increases. Some taxpayers in the higher income bracket have a tendency to
divert some portion of their income to their spouse, minor child etc. to minimize their
tax burden. In order to prevent such tax avoidance, clubbing provisions have been
incorporated in the Act, under which income arising to certain persons (like spouse,
minor child etc.) have to be included in the income of the person who has diverted
his income for the purpose of computing tax liability.
2. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN
ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
2.1 Transfer of income without transfer of asset [Section 60]
(i) If any person transfers the income from any asset without transferring the
asset itself, such income is to be included in the total income of the
transferor.
(ii) It is immaterial whether the transfer is revocable or irrevocable and whether
it was made before the commencement of this Act or after its
commencement.
Example 1: Mr. A confers the right to receive rent in respect of his house property
to his wife, Mrs. A, without transferring the house itself to her. In this case, the rent
received by Mrs. A will be clubbed with the income of Mr. A.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. Vatsan has transferred, through a duly registered document, the income arising
from a godown to his son, without transferring the godown. In whose hands will the
rental income from godown be charged?
SOLUTION
Section 60 expressly states that where there is transfer of income from an asset
without transfer of the asset itself, such income shall be included in the total
income of the transferor. Hence, the rental income derived from the godown shall
be clubbed in the hands of Mr. Vatsan.
2.2 Income arising from revocable transfer of assets
[Section 61]
All income arising to any person by virtue of a revocable transfer of assets is to be
included in the total income of the transferor.
Meaning of revocable transfer [Section 63]
Transfer is deemed to be revocable if—
(a) it contains any provision for the retransfer, directly or indirectly, of the
whole or any part of the income or assets to the transferor, or
(b) it gives, in any way to the transferor, a right to reassume power, directly or
indirectly, over the whole or any part of the income or the assets.
Clubbing provision will operate even if only part of income of the
transferred asset had been applied for the benefit of the transferor.
Once the transfer is revocable, the entire income from the transferred
asset is includible in the total income of the transferor.
4.5
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
Exception where clubbing provisions are not attracted even in case of
revocable transfer [Section 62]
Section 61 will not apply to any income arising to any person if there is –
(i) a transfer by way of trust which is not revocable during the life time of the
beneficiary; and
(ii) any other transfer, which is not revocable during the life time of the
transferee.
In the above cases, the income from the transferred asset is not includible in the
total income of the transferor, provided the transferor derives no direct or indirect
benefit from such income.
If the transferor receives direct or indirect benefit from such income, such income
is to be included in his total income even though the transfer may not be
revocable during the life time of the beneficiary or transferee, as the case may be.
As and when the power to revoke the transfer arises, the income arising by virtue
of such transfer will be included in the total income of the transferor.
Example 2: Mr. Rajesh transfers his house property to a trust for the benefit of
Mr. Ramesh till his death. This is a situation of irrevocable transfer till the death of
Mr. Ramesh. Hence, till then, the income from house property would be taxable in
the hands of the transferee i.e., the trust. However, after the death of Mr. Ramesh,
the income from house property would be included in the total income of
Mr. Rajesh as on that date, the transfer has become revocable.
3. INCOME OF OTHER PERSONS INCLUDIBLE IN
INDIVIDUAL’S TOTAL INCOME
3.1 Clubbing of income arising to spouse
(I) Income by way of remuneration from a concern in which the individual
has substantial interest [Section 64(1)(ii)]
(i) Remuneration in cash or kind to spouse from a concern in which the
individual has a substantial interest to be clubbed: In computing the
total income of any individual, all such income which arises, directly or
indirectly, to the spouse of such individual by way of salary, commission,
fees or any other form of remuneration, whether in cash or in kind, from a
concern in which such individual has a substantial interest shall be included.
Circumstances when an individual is deemed to have
substantial interest in a concern
Where the concern
In any other case
is a company
If equity shares carrying 20% or If such person is entitled, or such
more of voting power are person and one or more of his
beneficially owned by such person or relatives are entitled in the
partly by such person and partly by aggregate, to receive 20% or more
one or more of his relatives at any profitof such concern at any time
time during the P.Y. during the P.Y.
The term ‘relative’ in relation to an individual means the husband, wife,
brother or sister or any lineal ascendant or descendant of that individual
[Section 2(41)].
(ii) Clubbing provisions will not apply where remuneration is received on
account of technical or professional qualifications: Clubbing provisions,
however, does not apply where the spouse of the said individual possesses
technical or professional qualifications and the income to the spouse is
solely attributable to the application of his/her technical or professional
knowledge or experience. In such an event, the income arising to such
spouse is to be assessed in his/her hands.
(iii) Both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern: Where
both husband and wife have substantial interest in a concern and both are
in receipt of income by way of salary etc. from the said concern, such
income will be includible in the hands of that spouse, whose total income,
excluding such income is higher.
Where any such income is once included in the total income of either
spouse, income arising in the succeeding year shall not be included in the
total income of the other spouse unless the Assessing Officer is satisfied,
after giving that spouse an opportunity of being heard, that it is necessary to do so.
4.7
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd. Mrs. A is working as a
computer software programmer in X (P) Ltd. at a salary of ` 30,000 p.m. She is,
however, not qualified for the job. The other income of Mr. A & Mrs. A are
` 7,00,000 & ` 4,00,000, respectively. Compute the gross total income of Mr. A and
Mrs. A for the A.Y.2025-26 if they are paying tax under default tax regime
SOLUTION
Mr. A holds shares carrying 25% voting power in X (P) Ltd i.e., a substantial interest in
the company. His wife is working in the same company without any professional
qualifications for the same. Thus, by virtue of the clubbing provisions of the Act, the
salary received by Mrs. A from X (P) Ltd. will be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A.
Computation of Gross total income of Mr. A
Particulars
` `
Salary received by Mrs. A (` 30,000 × 12) 3,60,000
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 75,000 2,85,000
Other Income 7,00,000
Gross total income 9,85,000
The gross total income of Mrs. A is ` 4,00,000.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Will your answer be different if Mrs. A was qualified for the job?
SOLUTION
If Mrs. A possesses professional qualifications for the job, then the clubbing
provisions shall not be applicable.
Gross total income of Mr. A = ` 7,00,000 [Other income].
Gross total income of Mrs. A = Salary received by Mrs. A [` 30,000×12] less
` 75,000, being the standard deduction under section 16(ia) plus other income
[` 4,00,000] = ` 6,85,000
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. B holds shares carrying 30% voting power in Y (P) Ltd. Mrs. B is working as
accountant in Y (P) Ltd. getting income under the head salary (computed) of
` 3,44,000 without any qualification in accountancy. Mr. B also receives ` 30,000 as
interest on securities. Mrs. B owns a house property which she has let out. Rent
received from tenants is ` 6,000 p.m. Compute the gross total income of Mr. B and
Mrs. B for the A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
Since Mrs. B is not professionally qualified for the job, the clubbing provisions
shall be applicable.
Computation of Gross total income of Mr. B
Particulars
`
Income under the head “Salary” of Mrs. B (Computed) 3,44,000
Income from other sources
- Interest on securities 30,000
Gross total income 3,74,000
Computation of Gross total income of Mrs. B
` `
Particulars
Income from Salary Nil
[Clubbed in the hands of Mr. B]
Income from house property
Gross Annual Value [` 6,000 × 12] 72,000
Less: Municipal taxes paid -
Net Annual Value (NAV) 72,000
Less: Deductions under section 24
- 30% of NAV i.e., 30% of ` 72,000 21,600
- Interest on loan - 50,400
Gross total income 50,400
(II) Income arising to the spouse from an asset transferred without
adequate consideration [Section 64(1)(iv)]
(i) Transfer of asset (other than house property): Where there is a transfer
of an asset (other than house property), directly or indirectly, from one
spouse to the other, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in
4.9
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
connection with an agreement to live apart, any income arising to the
transferee-spouse from the transferred asset, either directly or indirectly,
shall be included in the total income of the transferor-spouse.
(ii) Transfer of house property: In the case of transfer of house property, the
provisions are contained in section 27. If an individual transfers a house
property to his spouse, without adequate consideration or otherwise than in
connection with an agreement to live apart, the transferor shall be deemed
to be the owner of the house property and its annual value will be taxed in
his hands.
(iii) Income from accretion of the transferred asset: It may be noted that any
income from the accretion of the transferred asset is not to be clubbed with
the income of the transferor. i.e., the income arising on transferred assets
alone have to be clubbed. Income earned by investing such income (arising
from transferred asset) cannot be clubbed.
(iv) Meaning of adequate consideration: It is also to be noted that natural
love and affection do not constitute adequate consideration. Therefore,
where an asset is transferred without adequate consideration, the income
from such asset will be clubbed in the hands of the transferor.
(v) Transferred asset invested in business: Where the assets transferred,
directly or indirectly, by an individual to his spouse are invested by the
transferee in the business, proportionate income arising to the transferee
from such investment is to be included in the total income of the transferor.
If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, proportionate
interest receivable by the transferee from the firm will be clubbed with the
income of the transferor.
Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of
the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the
total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm
as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Mr. Vaibhav started a proprietary business on 01.04.2023 with a capital of
` 5,00,000. He incurred a loss of ` 2,00,000 during the year 2023-24. To overcome the
financial position, his wife Mrs. Vaishaly, a software Engineer, gave a gift of
` 5,00,000 on 01.04.2024, which was immediately invested in the business by
Mr. Vaibhav. He earned a profit of ` 4,00,000 during the year 2024-25. Compute the
amount to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2025-26. If
Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount as loan, what would be the amount to be clubbed?
SOLUTION
Section 64(1)(iv) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of income
in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the assets (other than
house property) transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual,
otherwise than for adequate consideration or in connection with an agreement to
live apart.
In this case, Mr. Vaibhav received a gift of ` 5,00,000 on 1.4.2024 from his wife
Mrs. Vaishaly, which he invested in his business immediately. The income to be
clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the A.Y. 2025-26 is computed as under:
Particulars Mr. Vaibhav’s Capital Total (`)
capital contribution out
contribution (`) of gift from Mrs.
Vaishaly (`)
Capital as on 1.4.2024 3,00,000 5,00,000 8,00,000
(5,00,000 – 2,00,000)
Profit for P.Y.2024-25 1,50,000 2,50,000 4,00,000
to be apportioned on  3  5
4,00,000×  4,00,000× 
the basis of capital  8  8
employed on the first
day of the previous
year i.e., as on
1.4.2024 (3:5)
Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Mrs. Vaishaly for the
A.Y.2025-26 is ` 2,50,000.
In case Mrs. Vaishaly gave the said amount of ` 5,00,000 as a bona fide loan, then,
clubbing provisions would not be attracted.
Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the hands of
Mr. Vaibhav, since he has received a sum of money exceeding ` 50,000 without
consideration from a relative i.e., his wife.
4.11
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
(III) Transfer of assets for the benefit of spouse [Section 64(1)(vii)]
All income arising directly or indirectly to any person or association of persons,
from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, to such person or association of
persons by an individual without adequate consideration is includible in the
income of the individual to the extent such income is used by the transferee for
the immediate or deferred benefit of the transferor’s spouse.
3.2 Clubbing of income arising to son’s wife
(I) Income arising to son’s wife from the assets transferred without
adequate consideration by the father-in-law or mother-in-law
[Section 64(1)(vi)]
(i) Asset transferred without adequate consideration: Where an asset is
transferred, directly or indirectly, by an individual to his or her son’s wife
without adequate consideration, the income from such asset is to be
included in the total income of the transferor.
(ii) Asset transferred invested in the business: For this purpose, where the
assets transferred directly or indirectly by an individual to his or her son’s
wife are invested by the transferee in the business, proportionate income
arising from such investment is to be included in the total income of the
transferor. If the investment is in the nature of contribution of capital, the
proportionate interest receivable from firm will be clubbed with the income
of the transferor.
Such proportion has to be computed by taking into account the value of
the aforesaid investment as on the first day of the previous year to the
total investment in the business or by way of capital contribution in a firm
as a partner, as the case may be, by the transferee as on that day.
(II) Transfer of assets for the benefit of son’s wife [Section 64(1)(viii)]
All income arising directly or indirectly, to any person or association of
persons from the assets transferred, directly or indirectly, without adequate
consideration, to such person or association of persons by an individual will
be included in the total income of the individual to the extent such income
is used by the transferee for the immediate or deferred benefit of the
transferor’s son’s wife.
Where any asset is transferred by a person to any other person
without consideration or for inadequate consideration, the
provisions of 56(2)(x) would get attracted in the hands of
transferee, if conditions specified thereunder are satisfied.
ILLUSTRATION 6
Mrs. Kasturi transferred her immovable property to ABC Co. Ltd. subject to a
condition that out of the rental income, a sum of ` 36,000 per annum shall be
utilized for the benefit of her son’s wife.
Mrs. Kasturi claims that the amount of ` 36,000 (utilized by her son’s wife) should
not be included in her total income as she no longer owned the property.
Examine with reasons whether the contention of Mrs. Kasturi is valid in law.
SOLUTION
The clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii) are attracted in case of transfer
of any asset, directly or indirectly, otherwise than for adequate consideration, to
any person to the extent to which the income from such asset is for the
immediate or deferred benefit of son’s wife. Such income shall be included in
computing the total income of the transferor-individual.
Therefore, income of ` 36,000 meant for the benefit of daughter-in-law is
chargeable to tax in the hands of transferor i.e., Mrs. Kasturi in this case.
The contention of Mrs. Kasturi is, hence, not valid in law.
In order to attract the clubbing provisions under section 64(1)(viii), the transfer
should be otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case, it is presumed
that the transfer is otherwise than for adequate consideration and therefore, the
clubbing provisions are attracted. Moreover, the provisions of section 56(2)(x)
would also get attracted in the hands of ABC Co Ltd., if the conditions specified
thereunder are satisfied.
Note – If the transfer was for adequate consideration, the provisions of section
64(1)(viii) would not be attracted.
4.13
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
3.3 Clubbing of minor’s income [Section 64(1A)]
(i) All income of a minor is to be included in the income of his or her parent.
(ii) However, the income derived by the minor from manual work or from any
activity involving his skill, talent or specialised knowledge or experience will
not be included in the income of his parent.
(iii) The income of the minor will be included in the income of that parent,
whose total income, excluding minor’s income, is greater.
(iv) Once clubbing of minor’s income is done with that of one parent, it will
continue to be clubbed with that parent only, in subsequent years. The
Assessing Officer, may, however, club the minor’s income with that of the
other parent, if, after giving the other parent an opportunity to be heard, he
is satisfied that it is necessary to do so.
(v) Where the marriage of the parents does not subsist, the income of the
minor will be includible in the income of that parent who maintains the
minor child in the relevant previous year.
(vi) However, the income of a minor child suffering from any disability of the
nature specified in section 80U shall not be included in the hands of the
parent but shall be assessed in the hands of the child.
(vii) It may be noted that the clubbing provisions are attracted even in respect of
income of minor married daughter.
Exemption in respect of clubbed income of minor [Section 10(32)]
In case the income of an individual (i.e. the parent) includes the income of his
minor child in terms of section 64(1A), such parent shall be entitled to exemption
of ` 1,500 in respect of each minor child. However, if income of any minor so
includible is less than ` 1,500, then, the entire income shall be exempt.
Exemption under section 10(32) would be available to the parent only if he/she
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). The same would not be available to him/her under the
default tax regime where he/she computes his/her total income as per section
115BAC and pays tax at the concessional rates provided thereunder.
(viii) In case the asset transferred to a minor child (not being a minor married
daughter) without consideration or for inadequate consideration is a house
property, then, by virtue of section 27(i), the transferor-parent will be the
deemed owner of the house property. Therefore, the income from house
property will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-parent, being the
deemed owner and not in the hands of the minor child. Consequently,
clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect
of such income, due to which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32) (discussed
above) cannot be availed against such income.
However, if the house property is transferred by a parent to his or her minor
married daughter, without consideration or for inadequate consideration,
then, section 27(i) is not attracted. In such a case, the income from house
property will be included u/s 64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose total
income before including minor child’s income is higher; and benefit of
exemption u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in respect of the income
so included if he/she exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
ILLUSTRATION 7
Mr. A has three minor children – two twin daughters, aged 12 years, and one son,
aged 16 years. Income of the twin daughters is ` 2,000 p.a. each and that of the son
is ` 1,200 p.a. Mrs. A has transferred her flat to her minor son on 1.4.2024 out of
natural love and affection. The flat was let out on the same date and the rental
income from the flat is ` 10,000 p.m. Compute the income, in respect of minor
children, to be included in the hands of Mr. A and Mrs. A u/s 64(1A) (assuming that
Mr. A’s total income is higher than Mrs. A’s total income, before including the
income of minor children and both Mr. A and Mrs. A exercise the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Taxable income, in respect of minor children, in the hands of Mr. A is:
` `
Particulars
Twin minor daughters [` 2,000 × 2] 4,000
Less: Exempt under section 10(32) [` 1,500 × 2] 3,000 1,000
4.15
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
Minor son 1,200
Less: Exempt under section 10(32) 1,200 Nil
Income to be clubbed in the hands of Mr. A 1,000
Note – As per section 27(i), Mrs. A is the deemed owner of house property
transferred to her minor son. Natural love and affection do not constitute adequate
consideration for this purpose. Accordingly, the income from house property of
` 84,000 [i.e., ` 1,20,000 (-) ` 36,000, being 30% of ` 1,20,000) would be taxable
directly in her hands as the deemed owner of the said property. Consequently,
clubbing provisions under section 64(1A) would not be attracted in respect of
income from house property, owing to which exemption u/s 10(32) cannot be
availed by her.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Compute the gross total income of Mr. A & Mrs. A from the following information
assuming both exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A):
Particulars `
(a) Salary income (computed) of Mrs. A 2,30,000
(b) Income from profession of Mr. A 3,90,000
(c) Income of minor son B from company deposit 15,000
(d) Income of minor daughter C from special talent 32,000
(e) Interest from bank received by C on deposit made out of her
special talent 3,000
(f) Gift received by C on 30.09.2024 from friend of Mrs. A 2,500
Brief working is sufficient. Detailed computation under various heads of income is
not required.
SOLUTION
As per the provisions of section 64(1A) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, all the
income of a minor child has to be clubbed in the hands of that parent whose total
income (excluding the income of the minor) is greater. The income of Mr. A is
` 3,90,000 and income of Mrs. A is ` 2,30,000. Since the income of Mr. A is greater
than that of Mrs. A, the income of the minor children have to be clubbed in the
hands of Mr. A. It is assumed that this is the first year when clubbing provisions
are attracted.
Income derived by a minor child from any activity involving application of his/her
skill, talent, specialised knowledge and experience is not to be clubbed. Hence,
the income of minor child C from exercise of special talent will not be clubbed.
However, interest from bank deposit has to be clubbed even when deposit is
made out of income arising from application of special talent.
The Gross Total Income of Mrs. A is ` 2,30,000. The total income of Mr. A giving
effect to the provisions of section 64(1A) is as follows:
Computation of gross total income of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Income from profession 3,90,000
Income of minor son B from company deposit 15,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(32) 1,500 13,500
Income of minor daughter C
From special talent – not to be clubbed -
Interest from bank 3,000
Gift of ` 2,500 received from a non-relative is not taxable
under section 56(2)(x) being less than the aggregate limit
of ` 50,000 Nil
3,000
Less : Exemption under section 10(32) 1,500 1,500
Gross Total Income 4,05,000
4. CROSS TRANSFERS
In the case of cross transfers also (e.g., A making gift of ` 50,000 to the wife of his
brother B for the purchase of a house by her and a simultaneous gift by B to A’s
minor son of shares in a foreign company worth ` 50,000 owned by him), the
income from the assets transferred would be assessed in the hands of the
deemed transferor if the transfers are so intimately connected as to form part of a
single transaction, and each transfer constitutes consideration for the other by
4.17
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
being mutual or otherwise. Thus, in the instant case, the transfers have been
made by A and B to persons who are not their spouse or minor child so as to
circumvent the provisions of this section, showing that such transfers constituted
consideration for each other.
The Supreme Court, in case of CIT v. Keshavji Morarji [1967] 66 ITR 142, observed
that if two transactions are inter-connected and are parts of the same transaction
in such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a
device to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted.
Accordingly, the income arising to Mrs. B from the house property should be
included in the total income of B and the dividend from shares transferred to A’s
minor son would be taxable in the hands of A, assuming that Mr. A’s income is
higher than that of Mrs. A. This is because A and B are the indirect transferors to
their minor child and spouse, respectively, of income-yielding assets, so as to
reduce their burden of taxation.
ILLUSTRATION 9
Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother's wife on 14-6-2024. On
12-7-2024, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to Mr. Vasudevan's wife. The gifted
amounts were invested as fixed deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and wife of
Mr. Vasudevan's brother on 01-8-2024 at 9% interest. Examine the consequences of
the above under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the hands of
Mr. Vasudevan and his brother.
SOLUTION
In the given case, Mr. Vasudevan gifted a sum of ` 6 lakhs to his brother’s wife on
14.06.2024 and simultaneously, his brother gifted a sum of ` 5 lakhs to
Mr. Vasudevan’s wife on 12.07.2024. The gifted amounts were invested as fixed
deposits in banks by Mrs. Vasudevan and his brother’s wife. These transfers are in
the nature of cross transfers. Accordingly, the income from the assets transferred
would be assessed in the hands of the deemed transferor because the transfers
are so intimately connected to form part of a single transaction and each transfer
constitutes consideration for the other by being mutual or otherwise.
If two transactions are inter-connected and are part of the same transaction in
such a way that it can be said that the circuitous method was adopted as a device
to evade tax, the implication of clubbing provisions would be attracted. It was so
held by the Apex Court in CIT vs. Keshavji Morarji (1967) 66 ITR 142.
Accordingly, the interest income arising to Mrs. Vasudevan in the form of interest
on fixed deposits would be included in the total income of Mr. Vasudevan and
interest income arising in the hands of his brother’s wife would be taxable in the
hands of Mr. Vasudevan’s brother as per section 64(1), to the extent of amount of
cross transfers i.e., ` 5 lakhs.
This is because both Mr. Vasudevan and his brother are the indirect transferors of
the income to their respective spouses with an intention to reduce their burden of
taxation.
However, the interest income earned by his spouse on fixed deposit of ` 5 lakhs
alone would be included in the hands of Mr. Vasudevan’s brother and not the
interest income on the entire fixed deposit of ` 6 lakhs, since the cross transfer is
only to the extent of ` 5 lakhs.
5. CONVERSION OF SELF-ACQUIRED PROPERTY
INTO THE PROPERTY OF A HINDU
UNDIVIDED FAMILY [SECTION 64(2)]
Section 64(2) deals with the case of conversion of self-acquired property into
property of a Hindu undivided family.
(i) Where an individual, who is a member of the HUF, converts at any time after
31-12-1969, his individual property into property of the HUF of which he is
a member or throws such property into the common stock of the family or
otherwise transfers such individual property, directly or indirectly, to the
family otherwise than for adequate consideration, the income from such
property shall continue to be included in the total income of the individual.
(ii) Where the converted property has been partitioned, either by way of total
or partial partition, the income derived from such converted property as is
received by the spouse on partition will be deemed to arise to the spouse
from assets transferred indirectly by the individual to the spouse and
consequently, such income shall also be included in the total income of the
individual who effected the conversion of such property.
4.19
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
(iii) Where income from the converted property is included in the total income
of an individual under section 64(2), it will be excluded from the total
income of the family or, as the case may be, of the spouse of the individual.
6. INCOME INCLUDES LOSS
As per the Explanation 2 to section 64, ‘income’ would include ‘loss’. Accordingly,
where the specified income to be included in the total income of the individual is
a loss, such loss will be taken into account while computing the total income of
the individual. It is significant to note that this Explanation applies to clubbing
provisions under both sections 64(1) and 64(2).
7. DISTINCTION BETWEEN SECTION 61 AND
SECTION 64
It may be noted that the main distinction between the two sections is that
section 61 applies only to a revocable transfer made by any person while section
64 applies to revocable as well as irrevocable transfers made only by individuals.
Clubbing provisions are attracted in respect of income arising from the
assets transferred, however, income arising on accretion of income arising
from transferred asset, would not be clubbed except in case of minor child.
Example 3: Mr. X transferred debentures of ` 50,000 carrying 10% p.a. interest to
his wife. The interest income of ` 5,000 would be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X.
However, in case his wife deposited ` 5,000 in fixed deposits @8% p.a., the interest
income of ` 400 arising on FDR would not be clubbed in the hands of Mr. X.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Section Income to be Content
clubbed
60 Income When a person transfers the income accruing
transferred from an asset without the transfer of the
without transfer asset itself, such income is to be included in
of asset the total income of the transferor, whether
the transfer is revocable or irrevocable.
61 Income arising Such income is to be included in the hands of
from revocable the transferor.
transfer of assets A transfer is deemed to be revocable if it –
(i) contains any provision for re-transfer of
the whole or any part of the income or
assets to the transferor; or
(ii) gives right to re-assume power over the
whole or any part of the income or the
asset.
64(1)(ii) Income arising to Such income arising to spouse is to be
spouse by way of included in the total income of the individual.
remuneration from However, if remuneration received is
a concern in which attributable to the application of technical or
the individual has professional knowledge and experience of
substantial interest spouse, then, such income is not to be clubbed.
64(1)(iv) Income arising to Income arising from an asset (other than
spouse from house property) transferred otherwise than
assets transferred for adequate consideration or not in
without adequate connection with an agreement to live apart,
consideration from one spouse to another shall be included
in the total income of the transferor.
However, this provision will not apply in the
case of transfer of house property, since the
transferor-spouse would be the deemed
owner as per section 27.
4.21
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
64(1)(vi) Income arising to Income arising from an asset transferred
son’s wife from an otherwise than for adequate consideration, by
asset transferred an individual to his or her son’s wife shall be
without adequate included in the total income of the transferor.
consideration
64(1)(vii)/ Income arising All income arising to any person or
64(1)(viii) from transfer of association of persons from assets transferred
assets for the without adequate consideration is includible
benefit of spouse in the income of the transferor, to the extent
or son’s wife such income is used by the transferee for the
immediate or deferred benefit of the
transferor’s spouse or son’s wife.
64(1A) Income of minor All income arising or accruing to a minor
child child (including a minor married daughter)
shall be included in the total income of his or
her parent.
The income of the minor child shall be
included with the income of that parent,
whose total income, before including minor’s
income, is higher.
Where the marriage of the parents does not
subsist, the income of the minor will be
includible in the income of that parent who
maintains the minor child in the relevant
previous year.
The parent, in whose total income, the
income of the minor child or children are
included, shall be entitled to exemption of
such income subject to a maximum of ` 1,500
per child under section 10(32).
Exemption under section 10(32) would be
available to an assessee only if he exercises
the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
The following income of a minor child shall,
however, not be clubbed in the hands of his
or her parent –
(a) Income from manual work done by him
or activity involving application of
minor’s skill, talent or specialized
knowledge and experience; and
(b) Income of a minor child suffering from
any disability specified in section 80U.
In case the asset transferred to a minor child
(not being a minor married daughter) without
consideration or for inadequate consideration
is house property, then, by virtue of section
27(i), the transferor-parent will be the
deemed owner of the house property.
Therefore, the income from house property
will be taxable in the hands of the transferor-
parent, being the deemed owner and not in
the hands of the minor child. Consequently,
clubbing provisions u/s 64(1A) would not be
attracted in respect of such income, due to
which the benefit of exemption u/s 10(32)
cannot be availed against such income.
However, if the house property is transferred
by a parent to his or her minor married
daughter without consideration or for
inadequate consideration, then, section 27(i)
is not attracted. In such a case, the income
from house property will be included u/s
64(1A) in the hands of that parent, whose
total income before including minor child’s
income is higher; and benefit of exemption
u/s 10(32) can be availed by that parent in
respect of the income so included if he/she
exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
64(2) Conversion of Where an individual, who is a member of the
self-acquired HUF, converts his individual property into
property into the property of the HUF of which he is a member,
property of a HUF directly or indirectly, to the family otherwise
4.23
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
than for adequate consideration, the income
from such property shall continue to be
included in the total income of the individual.
Where the converted property has been
partitioned, either by way of total or partial
partition, the income derived from such
converted property as is received by the
spouse on partition shall also be included in
the total income of the individual who
effected the conversion of such property.
Note: As per Explanation 2 to section 64 ‘income’ includes ‘loss’. Therefore,
clubbing provisions would be attracted in all the above cases, even if there is a
loss and not income.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Mr. Sharma has four minor children - 2 daughters and 2 sons. The annual
income of 2 daughters were ` 9,000 and ` 4,500 and of sons were
` 6,200 and ` 4,300, respectively. The daughter who has income of ` 4,500
was suffering from a disability specified under section 80U.
Compute the amount of income earned by minor children to be clubbed in
hands of Mr. Sharma assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. During the previous year 2024-25, the following transactions occurred in
respect of Mr. A.
(a) Mr. A had a fixed deposit of ` 5,00,000 in Bank of India. He instructed
the bank to credit the interest on the deposit @ 9% p.a. from 1-4-2024
to 31-3-2025 to the savings bank account of Mr. B, son of his brother, to
help him in his education.
(b) Mr. A holds 75% profit share in a partnership firm. Mrs. A received a
commission of ` 25,000 from the firm for promoting the sales of the
firm. Mrs. A possesses no technical or professional qualification.
(c) Mr. A gifted a flat to Mrs. A on April 1, 2024. During the previous year
2024-25, Mrs. A’s “Income from house property” (computed) was
` 52,000 from such flat.
(d) Mr. A gifted ` 2,00,000 to his minor son who invested the same in a
business and he derived income of ` 20,000 from the investment.
(e) Mr. A’s minor son derived an income of ` 20,000 through a business
activity involving application of his skill and talent.
During the year, Mr. A got a monthly pension of ` 10,000. He had no other
income. Mrs. A received salary of ` 20,000 per month from a part time job.
Examine the tax implications of each transaction and compute the total
income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor child assuming that they exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
4.25
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
3. Mr. A has gifted a house property valued at ` 50 lakhs to his wife, Mrs. B, who
in turn has gifted the same to Mrs. C, their daughter-in-law. The house was
let out at ` 25,000 per month throughout the year. Compute the total income
of Mr. A and Mrs. C.
Will your answer be different if the said property was gifted to his son,
husband of Mrs. C?
4. A proprietary business was started by Smt. Rani in the year 2022. As on
1.4.2023 her capital in business was ` 3,00,000.
Her husband gifted ` 2,00,000 on 10.4.2023 to her and such sum is invested
by Smt. Rani in her business on the same date. Smt. Rani earned profits from
her proprietary business for the Financial Year 2023-24, ` 1,50,000 and
Financial Year 2024-25 ` 3,90,000. Compute the income, to be clubbed in the
hands of Rani’s husband for the Assessment year 2025-26 with reasons.
5. Mr. B is the Karta of a HUF, whose members derive income as given below:
Particulars `
(i) Income from B' s profession 45,000
(ii) Mrs. B' s salary as fashion designer 76,000
(iii) Minor son D (interest on fixed deposits with a bank 10,000
which were gifted to him by his uncle)
(iv) Minor daughter P's earnings from sports 95,000
(v) D's winnings from lottery (gross) 1,95,000
Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. and Mrs. B.
ANSWERS
1. As per section 64(1A), in computing the total income of an individual, all
such income accruing or arising to a minor child shall be included. However,
income of a minor child suffering from disability specified under section
80U would not be included in the income of the parent but would be
taxable in the hands of the minor child. Therefore, in this case, the income
of daughter suffering from disability specified under section 80U should not
be clubbed with the income of Mr. Sharma.
Under section 10(32), income of each minor child includible in the hands of
the parent under section 64(1A) would be exempt to the extent of the actual
income or ` 1,500, whichever is lower. Mr. Sharma would be eligible for
exemption u/s 10(32) since he has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The remaining
income would be included in the hands of the parent.
Computation of income earned by minor children to be clubbed with
the income of Mr. Sharma
Particulars
`
(i) Income of one daughter 9,000
Less: Income exempt under section 10(32) 1,500
Total (A) 7,500
(ii) Income of two sons (` 6,200 + ` 4,300) 10,500
Less: Income exempt under section 10(32)
(` 1,500 + ` 1,500) 3,000
Total (B) 7,500
Total Income to be clubbed as per section 64(1A) 15,000
(A+B)
Note: It has been assumed that:
(1) The income does not accrue or arise to the minor children on account
of any manual work done by them or activity involving application of
their skill, talent or specialized knowledge and experience;
(2) The income of Mr. Sharma, before including the minor children’s
income, is greater than the income of Mrs. Sharma, due to which the
income of the minor children would be included in his hands; and
(3) This is the first year in which clubbing provisions are attracted.
4.27
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
2. Computation of total income of Mr. A, Mrs. A and their minor son
for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Mr. A Mrs. A Minor
(`) (`) Son (`)
Income under the head
“Salaries”
Salary income (of Mrs. A) - 2,40,000 -
Pension income (of Mr. A)
(` 10,000×12) 1,20,000 -
Less: Standard deduction
under section 16(ia) 50,000 50,000
70,000 1,90,000
Income from House 52,000 - -
Property [See Note (3)
below]
Income from other sources
Interest on Mr. A’s fixed 45,000 - -
deposit with Bank of India
(` 5,00,000×9%) [See Note
(1) below]
Commission received by - -
Mrs. A from a partnership
firm, in which Mr. A has
substantial interest [See 25,000 70,000
Note (2) below]
Income before including 1,92,000 1,90,000 -
income of minor son under
section 64(1A)
Income of the minor son 18,500 - -
from the investment made in
the business out of the
amount gifted by Mr. A [See
Note (4) below]
Income of the minor son - - 20,000
through a business activity
involving application of his
skill and talent [See Note (5)
below]
Total Income 2,10,500 1,90,000 20,000
Notes:
(1) As per section 60, in case there is a transfer of income without transfer
of asset from which such income is derived, such income shall be
treated as income of the transferor. Therefore, the fixed deposit
interest of ` 45,000 transferred by Mr. A to Mr. B shall be included in
the total income of Mr. A.
(2) As per section 64(1)(ii), in case the spouse of the individual receives
any amount by way of income from any concern in which the
individual has substantial interest (i.e. holding shares carrying at least
20% voting power or entitled to at least 20% of the profits of the
concern), then, such income shall be included in the total income of
the individual. The only exception is in a case where the spouse
possesses any technical or professional qualifications and the income
earned is solely attributable to the application of her technical or
professional knowledge and experience, in which case, the clubbing
provisions would not apply.
In this case, the commission income of ` 25,000 received by Mrs. A
from the partnership firm has to be included in the total income of
Mr. A, as Mrs. A does not possess any technical or professional
qualification for earning such commission and Mr. A has substantial
interest in the partnership firm as he holds 75% profit share in the
firm.
(3) According to section 27(i), an individual who transfers any house
property to his or her spouse otherwise than for adequate
consideration or in connection with an agreement to live apart, shall
be deemed to be the owner of the house property so transferred.
Hence, Mr. A shall be deemed to be the owner of the flat gifted to
4.29
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
Mrs. A and hence, the income arising from the same shall be
computed in the hands of Mr. A.
Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the
hands of Mrs. A, since she has received immovable property without
consideration from a relative i.e., her husband.
(4) As per section 64(1A), the income of the minor child is to be included
in the total income of the parent whose total income (excluding the
income of minor child to be so clubbed) is greater. Further, as per
section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in the
income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per
child.
Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 received by minor son from the
investment made out of the sum gifted by Mr. A shall, after providing
for exemption of ` 1,500 under section 10(32), be included in the
income of Mr. A, since Mr. A’s income of ` 1,92,000 (before including
the income of the minor child) is greater than Mrs. A’s income of
` 1,90,000. Therefore, ` 18,500 (i.e., ` 20,000 – ` 1,500) shall be
included in Mr. A’s income. It is assumed that this is the first year in
which clubbing provisions are attracted.
Note: The provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be attracted in the
hands of the minor son, since he has received a sum of money
exceeding ` 50,000 without consideration from a relative i.e., his
father.
(5) In case the income earned by the minor child is on account of any
activity involving application of any skill or talent, then, such income
of the minor child shall not be included in the income of the parent
but shall be taxable in the hands of the minor child.
Therefore, the income of ` 20,000 derived by Mr. A’s minor son
through a business activity involving application of his skill and talent
shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent. Such income shall be
taxable in the hands of the minor son.
3. As per section 27(i), an individual who transfers otherwise than for adequate
consideration any house property to his spouse, not being a transfer in
connection with an agreement to live apart, shall be deemed to be the
owner of the house property so transferred.
Therefore, in this case, Mr. A would be the deemed owner of the house
property transferred to his wife Mrs. B without consideration.
As per section 64(1)(vi), income arising to the son’s wife from assets
transferred, directly or indirectly, to her by an individual otherwise than for
adequate consideration would be included in the total income of such
individual.
Income from let-out property is ` 2,10,000 [i.e., ` 3,00,000, being the actual
rent calculated at ` 25,000 per month less ` 90,000, being deduction under
section 24@30% of ` 3,00,000]
In this case, income of ` 2,10,000 from let-out property arising to Mrs. C,
being Mr. A’s son’s wife, would be included in the income of Mr. A, applying
the provisions of section 27(i) and section 64(1)(vi). Such income would,
therefore, not be taxable in the hands of Mrs. C.
In case the property was gifted to Mr. A’s son, the clubbing provisions under
section 64 would not apply, since the son is not a minor child. Therefore,
the income of ` 2,10,000 from letting out of property gifted to the son
would be taxable in the hands of the son.
It may be noted that the provisions of section 56(2)(x) would not be
attracted in the hands of the recipient of house property, since the receipt
of property in each case was from a “relative” of such individual. Therefore,
the stamp duty value of house property would not be chargeable to tax in
the hands of the recipient of immovable property, even though the house
property was received by her or him without consideration.
Note - The first part of the question can also be answered by applying the
provisions of section 64(1)(vi) directly to include the income of ` 2,10,000
arising to Mrs. C in the hands of Mr. A. [without first applying the provisions of
section 27(i) to deem Mr. A as the owner of the house property transferred to
his wife Mrs. B without consideration], since section 64(1)(vi) speaks of clubbing
of income arising to son’s wife from indirect transfer of assets to her by her
4.31
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
husband’s parent, without consideration. Gift of house property by Mr. A to
Mrs. C, via Mrs. B, can be viewed as an indirect transfer by Mr. A to Mrs. C.
4. Section 64(1) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 provides for the clubbing of
income in the hands of the individual, if the income earned is from the
assets transferred directly or indirectly to the spouse of the individual,
otherwise than for adequate consideration. In this case Smt. Rani received a
gift of ` 2,00,000 from her husband which she invested in her business. The
income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani’s husband for A.Y.2025-26
is computed as under:
Particulars Smt. Rani’s Capital
Capital Contribution Total
Contribution Out of gift
from
husband
` ` `
Capital as at 1.4.2023 3,00,000 - 3,00,000
Investment on 10.04.2023
out of gift received from her 2,00,000 2,00,000
husband
3,00,000 2,00,000 5,00,000
Profit for F.Y. 2023-24 to be
apportioned on the basis of
capital employed on the first
day of the previous year i.e., 1,50,000 1,50,000
on 1.4.2023
Capital employed as at 4,50,000 2,00,000 6,50,000
1.4.2024
Profit for F.Y.2024-25 to be
apportioned on the basis of
capital employed as at 2,70,000 1,20,000 3,90,000
1.4.2024 (i.e., 45 : 20)
Therefore, the income to be clubbed in the hands of Smt. Rani’s husband for
A.Y.2025-26 is ` 1,20,000.
5. Clubbing of income and other tax implications
As per the provisions of section 64(1A), in case the marriage of the parents
subsist, the income of a minor child shall be clubbed in the hands of the
parent whose total income, excluding the income of the minor child to be
clubbed, is greater. In this problem, it has been assumed that the marriage
of Mr. B and Mrs. B subsists.
Further, in case the income arises to the minor child on account of any
manual work done by the child or as a result of any activity involving
application of skill, talent, specialized knowledge or experience of the child,
then, the same shall not be clubbed in the hands of the parent.
Tax implications
(i) Income of ` 45,000 from Mr. B’s profession shall be taxable in the
hands of Mr. B under the head “Profits and gains of business or
profession”.
(ii) Salary of ` 1,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under section
16(ia) of ` 75,000) shall be taxable as “Salaries” in the hands of Mrs. B.
However, if Mrs. B exercises the option of shifting out of default tax
regime, salary of ` 26,000 (` 76,000 less standard deduction under
section 16(ia) of ` 50,000) shall be taxable as “Salaries”.
(iii) Income from fixed deposit of ` 10,000 arising to the minor son D, shall
be clubbed in the hands of the father, Mr. B as “Income from other
sources”, since Mr. B’s income is greater than income of Mrs. B before
including the income of the minor child.
As per section 10(32), income of a minor child which is includible in
the income of the parent shall be exempt to the extent of ` 1,500 per
child if such parent exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). The balance income
would be clubbed in the hands of the parent as “Income from other
sources”.
(iv) Income of ` 95,000 arising to the minor daughter P from sports shall
not be included in the hands of the parent, since such income has
arisen to the minor daughter on account of an activity involving
application of her skill.
4.33
IN ASSESSEE’S TOTAL INCOME
(v) Income of ` 1,95,000 arising to minor son D from lottery shall be
included in the hands of Mr. B as “Income from other sources”, since
Mr. B’s income is greater than the income of Mrs. B before including
the income of minor child.
Note – Mr. B can reduce the tax deducted at source from such lottery
income while computing his net tax liability.
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CHAP TER 5
AGGREGATION OF
INCOME, SET-OFF AND
CARRY FORWARD OF
LOSSES
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to –
♦ identify the permissible inter-source and inter-head adjustments;
♦ identify the restrictions to inter-source and inter-head set-off of
losses;
♦ comprehend the conditions to be satisfied for carry forward and set-
off of losses under different heads;
♦ state the maximum period for which different losses can be carried
forward;
♦ comprehend and arrange the order of set-off of losses;
♦ apply the above provisions to arrive at the total income of an assessee.
RETPAHC
CAB511
noitces
rednu
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednu
sessol
fo ffo
teS & drawrof
yrraC
dna
ffo
teS
sessol
debrosbanu
fo ffo-teS
dna
drawrof
yrraC
tnemtsujda
daeh-retnI
emocni
fo
daeh
emas
eht rednu
sessol
fo
ffo-tes
ecruos-retnI
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb
nac
ssol ssenisub
debrosbanU
morf
sniag
dna
stiforp
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof
sYA
mumixam
noisseforp
ro ssenisub
snoitpecxE
snoitpecxE
eb
nac
ssenisub
noitaluceps
morf
ssol
debrosbanU
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof sYA
mumixam
rof
drawrof
deirrac
daeh eht
rednu ssoL
ssenisub
noitaluceps
morf
emocni
ssol
dna ssol
noitalucepS
gninwo
fo ytivitca
eht
morf
fo sniag
dna stiforP“
latipac
mret
gnoL
morf
ssoL
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb
nac ssol
latipac
mret-gnoL
gniniatniam
dna
”no i fs fos e tefo
sr p e bro t os ns ne an cisub
ssol
ssenisub
evitaluceps
sniag
latipac
mret-gnol
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof
sYA
mumixam
-tes
eb tonnac
sesrohecar
rednu emocni
tsniaga
rednu
emocni
tsniaga
ffo
”seiralaS“
daeh eht
daeh rehto
yna
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb
nac ssol
latipac
mret-trohS
sniag
latipac
tsniaga
ffo-tes rof
sYA
mumixam
esuoh
morf ssoL
daeh
eht
rednu
ssoL
eb
tonnac
ytreporp
tonnac
”sniag latipaC“
dna
gninwo
fo
ytivitca
eht
morf
ssoL
dna
gninwo
fo ytivitca
eht morf
ssol
debrosbanU
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb
nac sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
tsniaga
ffo tes
tsniaga
ffo-tes
eb
sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
yna
rednu
emocni
eht
morf
emocni
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof sYA
mumixam
yna
rednu
emocni
sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
dna
gninwo
fo
ytivitca
daeh
rehto
.daeh
rehto
-
etoN
emocni
latot gnitupmoc
elihw
ffo tes
eb ot dewolla
ton
si
noitaicerped
/sessol
drawrof
thguorb
gniwolloF
CAB511
noitces
rednu
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednu
ytreporp
esuoh
deipucco-fles
morf
ssol
drawrof
thguorB.1
DA53 s/u
ssenisub
deificeps
fo
ssol
ssenisub
drawrof
thguorB.2
)AA2(53
s/u
ro
)iii(/)aii(/)ii()1(53
s/u noitcuded
fo
tnuocca
no
ssol
ssenisub
drawrof
thguorB.3
.)aii()1(23
s/u
noitaicerped
lanoitidda
ot elbatubirtta
noitaicerped
debrosbanU.4
5.2 INCOME TAX LAW
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
rednu
sessol
fo
ffo
teS
&
drawrof
yrraC
dna
ffo
teS
sessol
debrosbanu
fo ffo-teS
dna
drawrof
yrraC
tnemtsujda
daeh-retnI
emocni
fo
daeh
emas
eht
rednu
sessol
fo
ffo-tes
ecruos-retnI
deirrac
eb
nac ytreporp
esuoh morf
ssol
debrosbanU
emocni
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof sYA 8 mumixam
rof
drawrof
snoitpecxE
ytreporp
esuoh morf
snoitpecxE
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb
nac ssol ssenisub
debrosbanU
morf
sniag
dna stiforp
tsniaga ffo-tes
rof
sYA
mumixam
noisseforp
ro ssenisub
morf
ssol
,ssol
noitalucepS
daeh
eht
rednu
ssoL
s/u
ssenisub
deificeps
fo sniag
dna
stiforP“
latipac
mret
gnoL
morf
ssoL
eb
nac
ssenisub
noitaluceps
morf
ssol
debrosbanU
eht
morf
ssol
dna DA53
”noisseforp
ro
ssenisub
ssol
ssenisub
evitaluceps
tsniaga
ffo-tes
rof sYA
4 mumixam
rof
drawrof
deirrac
ffo
tes
eb tonnac
dna
gninwo
fo ytivitca
ssenisub
noitaluceps
morf
emocni
rednu
emocni
tsniaga
sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
”seiralaS“
daeh
eht
noitces
rednu
ssenisub
deificeps morf
ssol
debrosbanU
tsniaga
ffo-tes
eb tonnac
s/u
ssenisub
deificeps
morf
ssoL
-tes
rof
doirep
etinifedni
rof drawrof deirrac
eb
nac
DA53
rehto
yna
rednu
emocni
ssenisub
deificeps
yna morf tiforp
tsniaga
ffo
daeh
DA53
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb nac ssol latipac
mret-gnoL
dna
gninwo
fo
ytivitca
eht
morf
ssoL
sniag
latipac
mret-gnol
tsniaga ffo-tes
rof
sYA
mumixam
sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb nac ssol latipac
mret-trohS
esuoh
morf
ssoL
sniag
latipac tsniaga
ffo-tes rof sYA
8 mumixam
ffo
tes
eb
nac
ytreporp
latipaC“
daeh
eht
rednu
ssoL
rednu
emocni
tsniaga
tsniaga
ffo-tes
eb
tonnac
”sniag
dna
gninwo
fo ytivitca
eht morf ssol
debrosbanU
ot
ylno
daeh
rehto
yna
.daeh
rehto
yna
rednu
emocni
rof
drawrof
deirrac
eb nac sesroh
ecar
gniniatniam
fo tnetxe
eht
eht
morf
emocni tsniaga
ffo-tes rof
sYA
mumixam
sesroh
ecar gniniatniam
dna gninwo
fo
ytivitca
shkal
2 `
AGGREGATION OF INCOME, SET-OFF AND CARRY
5.3
FORWARD OF LOSSES
1. AGGREGATION OF INCOME
In certain cases, some amounts are deemed as income in the hands of the assessee
though they are actually not in the nature of income. These cases are contained in
sections 68, 69, 69A, 69B, 69C and 69D. These are discussed in detail in Chapter 1.
The Assessing Officer may require the assessee to furnish explanation in such cases.
If the assessee does not offer any explanation or the explanation offered by the
assessee is not satisfactory, the amounts referred to in these sections would be
deemed to be the income of the assessee. Such amounts have to be aggregated
with the assessee’s income.
2. CONCEPT OF SET-OFF AND CARRY FORWARD
OF LOSSES
Specific provisions have been made in the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the set-off and
carry forward of losses. In simple words, “Set-off” means adjustment of losses
against the profits from another source/head of income in the same assessment
year. If losses cannot be set-off in the same year due to inadequacy of eligible
profits, then such losses are carried forward to the next assessment year for
adjustment against the eligible profits of that year. The maximum period for which
different losses can be carried forward for set-off has been provided in the Act.
3. INTER SOURCE ADJUSTMENT [SECTION 70]
(i) Inter-source set-off of losses: Under this section, the losses incurred by the
assessee in respect of one source shall be set-off against income from any
other source under the same head of income, since the income under each
head is to be computed by grouping together the net result of the activities
of all the sources covered by that head. In simpler terms, loss from one source
of income can be adjusted against income from another source, both the
sources being under the same head.
Example 1: Loss from one house property can be set off against the income
from another house property.
5.5
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Example 2: Loss from one business, say textiles, can be set off against income
from any other business, say printing, in the same year as both these sources
of income fall under one head of income. Therefore, the loss in one business
may be set-off against the profits from another business in the same year.
(ii) Impermissible inter-source set-off: Inter-source set-off, however, is not
permissible in the following cases -
(a) Long-term capital loss [Section 70(3)]
Short-term capital loss is allowed to be set off against both short-term
capital gain and long-term capital gain. However, long-term capital loss
can be set-off only against long-term capital gain and not against short-
term capital gain.
(b) Speculation loss [Section 73(1)]
A loss in speculation business can be set-off only against the profits of
any other speculation business and not against any other business or
professional income.
However, losses from other business can be adjusted against profits
from speculation business.
(c) Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses
[Section 74A(3)]
Such loss can be set-off only against income from the activity of owning
and maintaining race horses.
(d) Losses from Specified business [Section 73A(1)]
In case of an assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), loss in any specified
business referred in section 35AD can be set-off only against any other
specified business.
However, losses from other business can be set-off against profits from
specified business.
Loss from an exempt source cannot be set-off against
income from a taxable source of income.
4. INTER HEAD ADJUSTMENT [SECTION 71]
Loss under one head of income can be adjusted or set off against income under
another head. However, the following points should be considered:
(i) Loss under any head other than capital gains: Where the net result of the
computation under any head of income (other than “Capital Gains”) is a loss,
the assessee can set-off such loss against his income assessable for that
assessment year under any other head, including “Capital Gains”.
(ii) Loss under the head “Profits and gains from business or profession”:
Where the net result of the computation under the head “Profits and gains of
business or profession” is a loss, such loss cannot be set off against income
under the head “Salaries”. It shall be allowed to set off from income under
any other head except “Salaries”.
(iii) Loss under the head “Capital Gains”: Where the net result of computation
under the head ‘Capital Gains’ is a loss, whether short term or long term, such
capital loss cannot be set-off against income under any other head.
(iv) Loss under the head “Income from house property”: The loss under the
head “Income from house property” would not be allowable to be set-off
against income under the other head if the assessee pays tax at concessional
rate u/s 115BAC.
However, if the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and there is a loss under the head
“Income from house property” and the assessee has income assessable under
any other head of income, the maximum loss from house property which can
be set-off against income from any other head is ` 2 lakhs. In other words, in
such case, the amount of such loss exceeding ` 2 lakhs would not be allowable
to be set-off against income under the other head.
(v) Speculation loss and loss from the activity of owning and maintaining
race horses cannot be set off against income under any other head.
(vi) Losses from Specified business u/s 35AD: In case of an assessee exercising
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A), loss from specified business referred to in section 35AD can be
set off only against income from any other specified business. Such loss
cannot be set off against income under any other head.
5.7
FORWARD OF LOSSES
If the income from a source is exempt from tax, loss from that exempt
source cannot be set off against taxable income from a different
source or taxable income under a different head.
5. CARRY FORWARD & SET-OFF OF LOSS FROM
HOUSE PROPERTY [SECTION 71B]
(i) Set-off and Carry Forward & Set-off of losses
(a) If the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A): In any assessment
year, if there is a loss under the head “Income from house property”,
such loss will first be set-off against income from any other head to the
extent of ` 2,00,000 during the same year. The unabsorbed loss will be
carried forward to the following assessment year to be set-off against
income under the head “Income from house property”.
(b) If the assessee pays tax at concessional rate u/s 115BAC: The loss
under the head “Income from house property” would not be allowable
to be set-off against income under any other head. The unabsorbed
loss cannot be carried forward to the following assessment year.
(ii) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: The loss under the
head “Income from house property” is allowed to be carried forward upto 8
assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year in which the
loss was first computed.
Once a particular loss is carried forward, it can be set off only
against the income from the same head in the forthcoming
assessment years.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. A, aged 35 years, submits the following particulars pertaining to the A.Y.2025-26:
Particulars `
Income from salary (computed) 4,00,000
Loss from let-out property (-) 2,20,000
Business loss (-)1,00,000
Bank interest (FD) received 80,000
Compute the total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming that
(i) He has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) He pays tax under the default tax regime.
SOLUTION
(i) Computation of total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
Particulars Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Income from salary 4,00,000
Less: Loss from house property of ` 2,20,000 to be
restricted to ` 2 lakhs by virtue of section 71(3A) (-) 2,00,000 2,00,000
Balance loss of ` 20,000 from house property
to be carried forward to next assessment year
Income from other sources (interest on fixed 80,000
deposit with bank)
Less: Business loss of ` 1,00,000 set-off to the
extent of ` 80,000 (-) 80,000 -
Business loss of ` 20,000 to be carried forward
for set-off against business income of the next
assessment year
Gross total income [See Note below] 2,00,000
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A Nil
Total income 2,00,000
5.9
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Notes:
(i) Gross Total Income includes salary income of ` 2,00,000 after adjusting
loss of ` 2,00,000 from house property. The balance loss of ` 20,000
from house property to be carried forward to next assessment year for
set-off against income from house property of that year.
(ii) Business loss of ` 1,00,000 is set off against bank interest of ` 80,000
and remaining business loss of ` 20,000 will be carried forward as it
cannot be set off against salary income.
(ii) Computation of total income of Mr. A for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime
Particulars Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Income from salary 4,00,000
Income from other sources (interest on fixed 80,000
deposit with bank)
Less: Business loss of ` 1,00,000 set-off to the
extent of ` 80,000 (-) 80,000 -
Business loss of ` 20,000 to be carried forward
for set-off against business income of the next
assessment year
Gross total income/ Total Income 4,00,000
Notes:
(i) Under the default tax regime, loss from house property of
` 2,20,000 cannot be set off against income under any other head and
cannot be carried forward to next assessment year.
(ii) Business loss of ` 1,00,000 is set off against bank interest of ` 80,000
and remaining business loss of ` 20,000 will be carried forward as it
cannot be set off against salary income.
6. CARRY FORWARD AND SET-OFF OF BUSINESS
LOSSES [SECTIONS 72]
Under the Act, the assessee has the right to carry forward the loss from business
and profession in cases where such loss cannot be set-off due to the absence or
inadequacy of income under any other head in the same year. The loss so carried
forward can be set-off against the profits of subsequent previous years.
Section 72 covers the carry forward and set-off of losses arising from a business or
profession.
Conditions
The assessee’s right to carry forward business losses under this section is, however,
subject to the following conditions:
(i) The loss should have been incurred in business, profession or vocation.
(ii) The loss should not be in the nature of a loss in the business of speculation.
(iii) Loss from one business can be carried forward & set-off against the
income from any other business: The loss may be carried forward and set-
off against the income from business or profession though not necessarily
against the profits and gains of the same business or profession in which the
loss was incurred.
However, a loss carried forward cannot, under any circumstances, be set-off
against the income from any head other than “Profits and gains of business
or profession”.
(iv) Person who incurred the loss alone is entitled to carry forward & set-off
the loss: The loss can be carried forward and set off only against the profits
of the assessee who incurred the loss. That is, only the person who has
incurred the loss is entitled to carry forward & set off the same. Consequently,
the successor of a business cannot carry forward & set off the losses of his
predecessor except in the case of succession by inheritance.
(v) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: A business loss can
be carried forward for a maximum period of 8 assessment years immediately
succeeding the assessment year in which the loss was incurred.
5.11
FORWARD OF LOSSES
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. B, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars for the P.Y.2024-25:
Particulars `
Income from salary (computed) 45,000
Income from house property (24,000)
Income from non-speculative business (22,000)
Income from speculative business (4,000)
Short-term capital losses (25,000)
Long-term capital gains taxable u/s 112 19,000
What is the total income chargeable to tax for the A.Y.2025-26, assuming that he
pays tax under section 115BAC?
SOLUTION
Total income of Mr. B for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars Amount Amount
(`) (`)
Income from salaries 45,000
Income from house property
Loss from house property can neither be set-off nor can Nil
be carried forward, since Mr. B is paying tax under the
default tax regime u/s 115BAC
Profits and gains of business and profession
Business loss to be carried forward [Note (i)] (22,000)
Speculative loss to be carried forward [Note (ii)] (4,000)
Capital Gains
Long term capital gain taxable u/s 112 19,000
Short term capital loss ` 25,000 set off against long-term
capital gains to the extent of ` 19,000 [Note (iii)] (19,000)
Nil
Balance short term capital loss of ` 6,000 to be carried
forward [Note (iii)]
Taxable income 45,000
Notes:
(i) Business loss cannot be set-off against salary income. Therefore, loss of
` 22,000 from the non-speculative business cannot be set off against the
income from salaries. Hence, such loss has to be carried forward to the next
year for set-off against business profits, if any.
(ii) Loss of ` 4,000 from the speculative business can be set off only against the
income from the speculative business. Hence, such loss has to be carried
forward.
(iii) Short term capital loss can be set off against both short term capital gain and
long-term capital gain. Therefore, short-term capital loss of ` 25,000 can be
set-off against long-term capital gains to the extent of ` 19,000. The balance
short term capital loss of ` 6,000 cannot be set-off against any other income
and has to be carried forward to the next year for set-off against capital gains,
if any.
7. LOSSES IN SPECULATION BUSINESS [SECTION 73]
The meaning of the expression ‘speculative transaction’ as defined in section 43(5)
and the treatment of income from speculation business has already been discussed
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
(i) Set-off and carry forward & set-off of loss from speculation business:
Since speculation is deemed to be a business distinct and separate from any
other business carried on by the assessee, the losses incurred in speculation
business can neither be set off in the same year against any other non-
speculation income nor be carried forward and set off against other income
in the subsequent years.
Therefore, if the losses sustained by an assessee in a speculation business
cannot be set-off in the same year against any other speculation profit, they
can be carried forward to subsequent years and set-off only against income
from any speculation business carried on by the assessee. Loss from the
activity of trading in derivatives, however, is not to be treated as speculative
loss.
5.13
FORWARD OF LOSSES
(ii) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: The loss in
speculation business can be carried forward only for a maximum period of
4 years from the end of the relevant assessment year in respect of which the
loss was computed.
(iii) When a business of a company deemed to be carrying on a speculation
business: The Explanation to this section provides that where any part of the
business of a company consists in the purchase and sale of the shares of other
companies, such company shall be deemed to be carrying on speculation
business to the extent to which the business consists of the purchase and sale
of such shares.
However, this deeming provision does not apply to the following companies –
(1) A company whose gross total income consists of mainly income
chargeable under the heads “Interest on securities”, “Income from
house property”, “Capital gains” and “Income from other sources”;
(2) A company, the principal business of which is –
(i) the business of trading in shares; or
(ii) the business of banking; or
(iii) the granting of loans and advances.
Thus, these companies would be exempted from the operation of this
Explanation. Accordingly, if these companies carry on the business of
purchase and sale of shares of other companies, they would not be deemed
to be carrying on speculation business.
8. CARRY FORWARD & SET OFF OF LOSSES OF
SPECIFIED BUSINESSES [SECTION 73A]
(i) Set-off and Carry forward & set-off of losses of specified business: An
assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A) and carrying on specified business, can
claim deduction u/s 35AD in respect of capital expenditure (other than land,
goodwill and financial instruments) incurred in respect of such business,
subject to fulfillment of specified conditions. Any loss computed in respect of
the specified business referred to in section 35AD can, however, be set off
only against profits and gains, if any, of any other specified business. The
unabsorbed loss, if any, will be carried forward for set off against profits and
gains of any specified business in the following assessment year and so on.
(ii) Loss can be set-off indefinitely: There is no time limit specified for carry
forward and set-off and therefore, such loss can be carried forward
indefinitely for set-off against income from specified business.
Under the optional tax regime, the loss of an assessee claiming deduction
under section 35AD in respect of a specified business can be set-off
against the profit of another specified business under section 73A,
irrespective of whether the latter is eligible for deduction under section 35AD. An
assessee can, therefore, set-off the losses of a hospital or hotel which begins to
operate after 1st April, 2010 and which is eligible for deduction under section 35AD,
against the profits of the existing business of operating a hospital (with atleast 100
beds for patients) or a hotel (of two-star or above category), even if the latter is not
eligible for deduction under section 35AD.
9. LOSSES UNDER THE HEAD ‘CAPITAL GAINS’
[SECTION 74]
Carry forward & set-off of losses: Section 74 provides that where, for any
assessment year, the net result under the head ‘Capital gains’ is short term capital
loss or long-term capital loss, the loss shall be carried forward to the following
assessment year to be set off in the following manner:
(i) Short-term capital loss: Where the loss so carried forward is a short-term
capital loss, it shall be set off against any capital gains, short term or long
term, arising in that year.
(ii) Long-term capital loss: Where the loss so carried forward is a long-term
capital loss, it shall be set off only against long term capital gain arising in
that year.
(iii) Loss under head capital gains: Net loss under the head capital gains cannot
be set off against income under any other head.
(iv) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of loss: Any unabsorbed loss
shall be carried forward to the following assessment year up to a maximum
5.15
FORWARD OF LOSSES
of 8 assessment years immediately succeeding the assessment year for which
the loss was first computed.
Long-term capital gain exceeding ` 1,25,000 arising on sale of equity shares
or units of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust on which STT is paid
- in respect of equity shares, both at the time of acquisition and sale and
- in respect of units of equity oriented fund or unit of business trust, at the time of sale
is taxable under section 112A @10% or 12.5%, as the case may be. Long-term
capital loss on sale of such shares/units can, therefore, be set-off and carried
forward for set-off against long-term capital gains by virtue of section 70(3) and
section 74.
ILLUSTRATION 3
During the P.Y. 2024-25, Mr. C has the following income and the brought forward
losses:
Particulars `
Short term capital gains on sale of shares 1,50,000
Long term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24 (96,000)
Short term capital loss of A.Y.2024-25 (37,000)
Long term capital gain u/s 112 75,000
What is the capital gain taxable in the hands of Mr. C for the A.Y.2025-26?
SOLUTION
Taxable capital gains of Mr. C for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Short term capital gains on sale of shares 1,50,000
Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss of the
A.Y.2024-25 (37,000) 1,13,000
Long term capital gain 75,000
Less: Brought forward long-term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24
` 96,000 set off to the extent of ` 75,000 (75,000) Nil
[See Note below]
Taxable short-term capital gains 1,13,000
Note: Long-term capital loss cannot be set off against short-term capital gain.
Hence, the unadjusted long-term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24 of ` 21,000 (i.e.
` 96,000 – ` 75,000) can be carried forward to the next year to be set-off against
long-term capital gains of that year.
10. LOSSES FROM THE ACTIVITY OF OWNING
AND MAINTAINING RACE HORSES
[SECTION 74A(3)]
(i) Set-off and Carry forward & set-off of loss: According to the provisions of
section 74A(3), the losses incurred by an assessee from the activity of owning
and maintaining race horses cannot be set-off against the income from any
other source other than the activity of owning and maintaining race horses.
(ii) Maximum period for carry forward & set-off of losses: Such loss can be
carried forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years for being set-
off against the income from the activity of owning and maintaining race
horses in the subsequent years.
(iii) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
Amount of loss (i) In case assessee has no income by way of stake
incurred by the money – Amount of revenue expenditure incurred
assessee in the by the assessee wholly & exclusively for the purpose
activity of of maintaining race horses.
owning and (ii) In case assessee has income by way of stake
maintaining money - The amount by which such income by way
racehorses of stake money falls short of the amount of revenue
expenditure incurred by the assessee wholly &
exclusively for the purpose of maintaining race
horses. i.e., Loss = Stake money – revenue
expenditure for the purpose of maintaining race
horses.
Horse race A horse race upon which wagering or betting maybe
lawfully made.
5.17
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Income by way of The gross amount of prize money received on a race
stake money horse or race horses by the owner thereof on
account of the horse or horses or anyone or more of
the horses winning or being placed second or in any
lower position in horse races.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Mr. D has the following income for the P.Y.2024-25:
Particulars `
Income from the activity of owning and maintaining the race horses 75,000
Income from textile business 85,000
Brought forward textile business loss (relating to A.Y. 2024-25) 50,000
Brought forward loss from the activity of owning and maintaining the 96,000
race horses (relating to A.Y.2022-23)
What is the total income in the hands of Mr. D for the A.Y. 2025-26?
SOLUTION
Total income of Mr. D for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Income from the activity of owning and maintaining race 75,000
horses
Less: Brought forward loss of ` 96,000 from the activity of
owning and maintaining race horses set-off to the extent of
` 75,000 75,000
Nil
Balance loss of ` 21,000 (` 96,000 – ` 75,000) from the activity
of owning and maintaining race horses to be carried forward
to A.Y.2026-27
Income from textile business 85,000
Less: Brought forward business loss from textile business 50,000 35,000
Total income 35,000
Note: Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses cannot be set-
off against any other source/head of income.
11. ORDER OF SET-OFF OF LOSSES
As per the provisions of section 72(2), brought forward business loss is to be set-
off before setting off unabsorbed depreciation. Therefore, the order in which set-
off will be effected is as follows -
(a) Current year depreciation [Section 32(1)];
(b) Current year capital expenditure on scientific research and current year
expenditure on family planning, to the extent allowed.
(c) Brought forward loss from business/profession [Section 72(1)];
(d) Unabsorbed depreciation [Section 32(2)];
(e) Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research [Section 35(4)];
(f) Unabsorbed expenditure on family planning [Section 36(1)(ix)].
ILLUSTRATION 5
Mr. E has furnished his details for the A.Y.2025-26 as under:
Particulars `
Income from salaries (computed) 1,50,000
Income from speculation business 60,000
Loss from non-speculation business (40,000)
Short term capital gain 80,000
Long term capital loss of A.Y.2023-24 (30,000)
Winning from lotteries (Gross) 20,000
Compute the total income of Mr. E for the A.Y.2025-26.
SOLUTION
Computation of total income of Mr. E for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Income from salaries 1,50,000
Income from speculation business 60,000
Less : Loss from non-speculation business (40,000) 20,000
5.19
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Short-term capital gain 80,000
Winnings from lotteries 20,000
Taxable income 2,70,000
Note: Long term capital loss can be set off only against long term capital gain.
Therefore, long term capital loss of ` 30,000 has to be carried forward to the next
assessment year.
12. SUBMISSION OF RETURN OF LOSSES
[SECTION 80]
As per section 80,
- business loss under section 72(1),
- speculation business loss under section 73(2),
- loss from specified business under section 73A(2), in case the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A),
- loss under the head “Capital Gains” under section 74(1) and
- loss from activity of owning and maintaining race horses under section
74A(3),
which has not been determined in pursuance of a return filed under section 139(3)
can not be carried forward and set-off. Thus, the assessee must have filed a return
of loss under section 139(3) in order to carry forward and set off of such losses.
Such a return of loss should be filed within the time allowed under section 139(1).
This condition does not apply to a loss from house property carried
forward under section 71B and unabsorbed depreciation carried forward
under section 32(2).
LET US RECAPITULATE
Inter-source and Inter-head set-off of losses [Sections 70 & 71]
Section Provision Exceptions
70 Inter-source set-off of (i) Loss from speculation business
losses under the same head can be set-off only against
of income profits from another speculation
Any loss in respect of one business.
source shall be set-off
(ii) Long term capital loss (LTCL) can
against income from any
be set-off only against Long term
other source under the same
capital gains (LTCG).
head of income. For example,
(iii) Loss from the activity of owning
- loss from textile business
and maintaining race horses can
can be set-off against profit
be set-off only against income
from printing business.
from the activity of owning and
- loss from one house
maintaining race horses.
property can be set-off
(iv) An assessee carrying on specified
against income from another
business u/s 35AD and exercising
house property.
the option of shifting out of the
- short-term capital loss
default tax regime provided under
(STCL) can be set-off against
section 115BAC(1A), would be
both STCG and LTCG.
eligible for deduction u/s 35AD. In
such a case, loss from specified
business under section 35AD can
be set-off only against profits
from any other specified business.
71 Inter head adjustment (i) Loss under the head “Profits and
Loss under one head of gains of business or profession”
income can be set-off against cannot be set off against income
income assessable under any under the head “Salaries”
other head of income.
(ii) Loss under the head “Capital
gains” cannot be set-off against
income under any other head.
5.21
FORWARD OF LOSSES
For example, business loss (iii) Speculation loss and loss from
can be set-off against income the activity of owning and
from house property. maintaining racehorses cannot
be set-off against income under
any other head.
(iv) In case of an assessee exercising
the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A) and
claiming deduction u/s 35AD,
loss from specified business u/s
35AD cannot be set off against
income under any other head.
(v) The loss under the head “Income
from house property” would not
be allowable to be set-off
against income under the other
head and cannot be carried
forward if the assessee pays tax
at concessional rate u/s 115BAC.
However, if the assessee
exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime
provided under section
115BAC(1A), loss from house
property can be set-off against
income under any other head
only to the extent of
` 2 lakhs. The remaining loss can
be carried forward for set-off
against income from house
property of the succeeding
year(s).
Losses which cannot be set-off or carried forward
Loss from gambling, betting, card games etc.
Loss from an exempt source [for example, share of loss of partnership firm
cannot be set-off against any other business income]
Maximum period of carry forward of losses & Manner of set-off of brought
forward losses
Section Nature of loss to be Income against which Maximum period
carried forward the brought forward [from the end of
loss can be set-off the relevant
assessment year]
for carry forward
of losses
32(2) Unabsorbed Income under any head Indefinite period
depreciation other than salaries
71B Unabsorbed loss from Income from house 8 assessment years
house property property
72 Unabsorbed business Profits and gains from 8 assessment years
loss business or profession
73 Loss from speculation Income from any 4 assessment years
business speculation business
73A Loss from specified Profit from any Indefinite period
business u/s 35AD, in specified business,
case of an assessee irrespective of whether
exercising the option of such business is eligible
shifting out of the for deduction u/s
default tax regime 35AD.
provided under section
115BAC(1A)
74 Long-term capital loss Long-term capital gains 8 assessment years
Short-term capital loss Short-term/Long-term 8 assessment years
capital gains
74A Loss from the activity Income from the 4 assessment years
of owning and activity of owning and
maintaining race maintaining race
horses horses.
5.23
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Order of set-off of losses
1. Current year depreciation / Current year capital expenditure on scientific
research and current year expenditure on family planning, to the extent
allowed.
2. Brought forward loss from business/profession [Section 72(1)]
3. Unabsorbed depreciation [Section 32(2)]
4. Unabsorbed capital expenditure on scientific research [Section 35(4)].
5. Unabsorbed expenditure on family planning [Section 36(1)(ix)]
Note - As per section 80, filing of loss return under section 139(3) within the due
date specified under section 139(1) is mandatory for carry forward of the above
losses except loss from house property and unabsorbed depreciation.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Compute the gross total income of Mr. F for the A.Y. 2025-26 from the
information given below –
Particulars `
Income from house property (computed) 1,25,000
Income from business (before providing for depreciation) 1,35,000
Short term capital gains on sale of unlisted shares 56,000
Long term capital loss from sale of property (brought forward (90,000)
from A.Y. 2024-25)
Income from tea business 1,20,000
Dividends from Indian companies carrying on agricultural 80,000
operations (Gross)
Current year depreciation 26,000
Brought forward business loss (loss incurred six years ago) (45,000)
2. Mr. Soohan submits the following details of his income for the A.Y.2025-26:
Particulars `
Income from salary (computed) 3,00,000
Loss from let out house property (-) 40,000
Income from sugar business 50,000
Loss from iron ore business for P.Y. 2019-20 (discontinued in (-) 1,20,000
P.Y. 2020-21)
Short term capital loss (-) 60,000
Long term capital gain 40,000
Dividend 5,000
Income received from lottery winning (Gross) 50,000
Winnings from card games (Gross) 6,000
Agricultural income 20,000
Short-term capital loss under section 111A (-) 10,000
Bank interest on Fixed deposit 5,000
5.25
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Calculate gross total income and losses to be carried forward, assuming that he
has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
3. Mr. Batra furnishes the following details for year ended 31.03.2025:
Particulars `
Short term capital gain 1,40,000
Loss from speculative business 60,000
Long term capital gain on sale of land 30,000
Long term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares 1,00,000
Income from business of textile (after allowing current year 50,000
depreciation)
Income from activity of owning and maintaining race horses 15,000
Income from salary (computed) 1,00,000
Loss from house property 40,000
Following are the brought forward losses:
(i) Losses from activity of owning and maintaining race horses-pertaining
to A.Y.2022-23 - ` 25,000.
(ii) Brought forward loss from business of textile ` 60,000 - Loss pertains to
A.Y. 2017-18.
Compute gross total income of Mr. Batra for the Assessment Year 2025-26,
assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Also determine the losses eligible
for carry forward to the A.Y. 2026-27.
4. Mr. A furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.03.2025:
(` )
(i) Income from plying of vehicles (computed as per books) (He 3,20,000
owned 5 light goods vehicle throughout the year)
(ii) Income from retail trade of garments (Computed as per 7,50,000
books)
(Sales turnover ` 1,35,70,000)
Mr. A had declared income on presumptive basis under
section 44AD for the first time in A.Y.2025-26. Assume
10% of the turnover during the P.Y.2024-25 was received
in cash and balance through A/c payee cheque and all the
payments in respect of expenditure were also made
through A/c payee cheque or debit card.
(iii) He has brought forward depreciation relating to 1,00,000
A.Y. 2023-24
Compute taxable income of Mr. A and his tax liability for the A.Y. 2025-26 with
reasons for your computation, assuming that he exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
5. Mr. Aditya furnishes the following details for the year ended 31-03-2025:
Particulars Amount
(`)
Loss from speculative business A 25,000
Income from speculative business B 5,000
Loss from specified business covered under section 35AD 20,000
Income from salary (computed) 3,00,000
Loss from let out house property 2,50,000
Income from trading business 45,000
Long-term capital gain from sale of urban land 2,00,000
Long-term capital loss on sale of shares (STT not paid) 75,000
Long-term capital loss on sale of listed shares in recognized 1,02,000
stock exchange (STT paid at the time of acquisition and sale of
shares)
Following are the brought forward losses:
(1) Losses from owning and maintaining of race horses pertaining to
A.Y. 2023-24 ` 2,000.
(2) Brought forward loss from trading business ` 5,000 relating to
A.Y.2020-21.
Compute the total income of Mr. Aditya and show the items eligible for carry
forward, assuming that he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
5.27
FORWARD OF LOSSES
6. Mr. Garg, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars of his income
and other details for the P.Y. 2024-25.
Particulars `
(1) Income from Salary (computed) 15,000
(2) Income from business 66,000
(3) Long term capital gain on sale of land 10,800
(4) Loss on maintenance of race horses 15,000
(5) Loss from gambling 9,100
The other details of unabsorbed depreciation and brought forward losses
pertaining to A.Y. 2024-25 are as follows:
Particulars `
(1) Unabsorbed depreciation 11,000
(2) Loss from Speculative business 22,000
(3) Short term capital loss 9,800
Compute the Gross total income of Mr. Garg for the A.Y. 2025-26 and the
amount of loss, if any that can be carried forward or not.
7. The following are the details relating to Mr. Srivatsan, a resident Indian, aged
57, relating to the year ended 31.3.2025:
Particulars `
Income from salaries (computed) 2,20,000
Loss from house property 1,90,000
Loss from cloth business 2,40,000
Income from speculation business 30,000
Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD 20,000
Long-term capital gains from sale of urban land 2,50,000
Loss from card games 32,000
Income from betting (Gross) 45,000
Life Insurance Premium paid (10% of the capital sum assured) 45,000
Compute the total income and show the items eligible for carry forward,
assuming that he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
8. Mr. Rajat submits the following information for the financial year ending
31st March, 2025. He decides to pay tax under the default tax regime u/s
115BAC. He desires that you should:
(a) Compute the total income; and
(b) Ascertain the amount of losses that can be carried forward.
Particulars `
(i) He has two let out house property:
(a) House No. I – Income after all statutory deductions 72,000
(b) House No. II – Current year loss (30,000)
(ii) He has three proprietary businesses:
(a) Textile Business:
(i) Discontinued from 31st October, 2024 – Current 40,000
year loss
(ii) Brought forward business loss of A.Y.2020-21 95,000
(b) Chemical Business:
(i) Discontinued from 1st March, 2022 – hence no Nil
profit/loss
(ii) Bad debts allowed in earlier years recovered during 35,000
this year
(iii) Brought forward business loss of A.Y. 2021-22 50,000
(c) Leather Business: Profit for the current year 1,00,000
(d) Share of profit in a firm in which he is partner since 16,550
(iii) (a) Short-term capital gain 60,000
(b) Long-term capital loss 35,000
(iv) Contribution to LIC towards premium 10,000
9. Ms. Geeta, a resident individual, provides the following details of her income/
losses for the year ended 31.3.2025:
(i) Salary received as a partner from a partnership firm ` 7,50,000. The same
was allowed to the firm.
5.29
FORWARD OF LOSSES
(ii) Loss on sale of shares listed in BSE ` 3,00,000. Shares were held for 15
months and STT paid on sale and acquisition.
(iii) Long-term capital gain on sale of land ` 5,00,000.
(iv) ` 51,000 received in cash from friends in party.
(v) ` 55,000, being dividend income on listed equity shares of domestic
companies.
(vi) Brought forward business loss of A.Y. 2023-24 ` 12,50,000.
Compute gross total income of Ms. Geeta for the A.Y. 2025-26 and ascertain
the amount of loss that can be carried forward.
10. Mr. P, a resident individual, furnishes the following particulars of his income
and other details for the previous year 2024-25:
Sl. No. Particulars `
(i) Income from salary (computed) 18,000
(ii) Net annual value of house property 70,000
(iii) Income from business 80,000
(iv) Income from speculative business 12,000
(v) Long term capital gain on sale of land 15,800
(vi) Loss on maintenance of race horse 9,000
(vii) Loss on gambling 8,000
Depreciation allowable under the Income-tax Act, 1961, comes to ` 8,000, for
which no treatment is given above.
The other details of unabsorbed depreciation and brought forward losses
(pertaining to A.Y. 2023-24) are:
Sl. No. Particulars `
(i) Unabsorbed depreciation 9,000
(ii) Loss from speculative business 16,000
(iii) Short term capital loss 7,800
Compute the gross total income of Mr. P for the A.Y. 2025-26, and the amount
of loss that can or cannot be carried forward.
ANSWERS
1. Gross Total Income of Mr. F for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
Income from house property (Computed) 1,25,000
Income from business
Profits before depreciation 1,35,000
Less: Current year depreciation 26,000
Less: Brought forward business loss 45,000
64,000
Income from tea business (40% is business income) 48,000 1,12,000
Capital gains
Short-term capital gains 56,000
Income from Other Sources
Dividend income (taxable in the hands of
shareholders) 80,000
Gross Total Income 3,73,000
Notes:
(1) Dividend from Indian companies is taxable at normal rates of tax in the
hands of resident shareholders.
(2) 60% of the income from tea business is treated as agricultural income
and therefore, exempt from tax;
(3) Long-term capital loss can be set-off only against long-term capital
gains. Therefore, long-term capital loss of ` 90,000 brought forward
from A.Y.2024-25 cannot be set-off in the A.Y.2025-26, since there is no
long-term capital gains in that year. It has to be carried forward for set-
off against long-term capital gains, if any, during A.Y.2026-27.
5.31
FORWARD OF LOSSES
2. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Soohan for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Salaries
Income from salary 3,00,000
Less: Loss from house property set-off against salary
income as per section 71 (40,000) 2,60,000
Profits and gains of business or profession
Income from sugar business 50,000
Less: Brought forward loss of ` 1,20,000 from iron-
ore business set-off as per section 72(1) to the (50,000) Nil
extent of ` 50,000
Balance business loss of ` 70,000 of P.Y.2019-20 to
be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27
Capital gains
Long term capital gain 40,000
Less: Short term capital loss of ` 60,000 set-off to
the extent of ` 40,000 (40,000) Nil
Balance short-term capital loss of ` 20,000 to be
carried forward
Short-term capital loss of ` 10,000 u/s 111A also to
be carried forward
Income from other sources
Dividend (fully taxable in the hands of shareholders) 5,000
Winnings from lottery 50,000
Winnings from card games 6,000
Bank FD interest 5,000 66,000
Gross Total Income 3,26,000
Losses to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27
Loss of iron-ore business (` 1,20,000 – ` 50,000) 70,000
Short term capital loss (` 20,000 + ` 10,000) 30,000
Note: Agricultural income is exempt under section 10(1).
3. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Batra for the A.Y. 2025-26
` `
Particulars
Salaries 1,00,000
Less: Current year loss from house property (40,000) 60,000
Profit and gains of business or profession
Income from textile business 50,000
Less: Loss of ` 60,000 from textile business b/f from
A.Y. 2017-18 set-off to the extent of ` 50,000 [See 50,000 NIL
Note 1]
Income from the activity of owning and 15,000
maintaining race horses
Less: Loss of ` 25,000 from activity of owning and
maintaining race horses b/f from A.Y. 2022-23 set-
off to the extent of ` 15,000 15,000 NIL
Balance loss of ` 10,000 to be carried forward to
A.Y. 2026-27 [See Note 2]
Capital Gain
Short term capital gain 1,40,000
Long term capital gain on sale of land 30,000
Less: Long term capital loss of ` 1,00,000 on sale of
unlisted shares set-off to the extent of ` 30,000 30,000 NIL
Balance loss of ` 70,000 to be carried forward to
A.Y. 2026-27 [See Note 3]
Gross Total Income 2,00,000
Losses to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27
`
Particulars
Current year loss from speculative business [See Note-4] 60,000
Current year long term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares 70,000
Loss from activity of owning and maintaining of race horse 10,000
pertaining to A.Y.2022-23
5.33
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Notes: -
(1) As per section 72(3), business loss can be carried forward for a
maximum of eight assessment years immediately succeeding the
assessment year for which the loss was first computed. Since the eight
year period for carry forward of business loss of A.Y. 2017-18 expired in
the A.Y. 2025-26, the balance unabsorbed business loss of ` 10,000
cannot be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27.
(2) As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred on maintenance of race horses
cannot be set-off against income from any source other than the
activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried
forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years.
(3) Long-term capital loss on sale of unlisted shares can be set-off against
long-term capital gain on sale of land. The balance loss of
` 70,000 cannot be set-off against short term capital gain or against any
other head of income. The same has to be carried forward for set-off
against long-term capital gain of the subsequent assessment year. Such
long-term capital loss can be carried forward for a maximum of eight
assessment years.
(4) Loss from speculation business cannot be set-off against any income
other than profit and gains of another speculation business. Such loss
can, however, be carried forward for a maximum of four years as per
section 73(4) to be set-off against income from speculation business.
4. Computation of total income and tax liability of
Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Income from retail trade – as per books (See Note 1 below) 7,50,000
Income from plying of vehicles – as per books (See Note 2
below) 3,20,000
10,70,000
Less : Set off of b/f depreciation relating to A.Y. 2023-24 1,00,000
Total income 9,70,000
Tax liability 1,06,500
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 4,260
Total tax liability 1,10,760
Note:
1. Income from retail trade: Presumptive business income under section
44AD is ` 8,41,340 i.e., 8% of ` 13,57,000, being 10% of the turnover
received in cash and 6% of ` 1,22,13,000, being the amount of sales
turnover received through A/c payee cheque. However, the income
computed as per books is ` 7,50,000 which is to be further reduced by
the amount of unabsorbed depreciation of ` 1,00,000. Since the income
computed as per books is lower than the income deemed under section
44AD, the assessee can adopt the income as per books.
However, if he does not declare profits as per presumptive taxation
under section 44AD, he has to get his books of accounts audited under
section 44AB, since his turnover exceeds ` 1 crore (the enhanced limit
of ` 10 crore would not be available, since more than 5% of the turnover
is received in cash). Also, his case would be falling under section
44AD(4) and hence, tax audit is mandatory. It may further be noted that
he cannot declare income under presumptive provisions under section
44AD for next five assessment years, if he does not declared profits as
per presumptive provisions under section 44AD this year.
2. Income from plying of light goods vehicles: Income calculated under
section 44AE(1) would be ` 7,500 x 12 x 5 which is equal to
` 4,50,000. However, the income from plying of vehicles as per books is
` 3,20,000, which is lower than the presumptive income of
` 4,50,000 calculated as per section 44AE(1). Hence, the assessee can
adopt the income as per books i.e. ` 3,20,000, provided he maintains
books of account as per section 44AA and gets his accounts audited
and furnishes an audit report as required under section 44AB.
It is to be further noted that in both the above cases, if income is declared
under presumptive provisions, all deductions under sections 30 to 38,
including depreciation would have been deemed to have been given full
effect to and no further deduction under those sections would be allowable.
If income is declared as per presumptive provisions, his total income would
be as under:
Particulars
`
Income from retail trade under section 44AD [` 13,57,000@ 8,41,340
8% plus ` 1,22,13,000 @6%]
5.35
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Income from plying of light goods vehicles under section 4,50,000
44AE [` 7,500 x 12 x 5]
12,91,340
Less: Set off of brought forward depreciation – not possible as
it is deemed that it has been allowed and set off Nil
Total income 12,91,340
Tax thereon 1,99,902
Add : Health and Education cess @4% 7,996
Total tax liability 2,07,898
Total tax liability (rounded off) 2,07,900
5. Computation of total income of Mr. Aditya for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Salaries
Income from Salary 3,00,000
Less: Loss from house property set-off against salary
income as per section 71(3A) 2,00,000 1,00,000
Loss from house property to the extent not set off
i.e. ` 50,000 (` 2,50,000 – ` 2,00,000) to be carried
forward to A.Y. 2026-27
Profits and gains of business or profession
Income from trading business 45,000
Less: Brought forward loss from trading business of
A.Y. 2020-21 can be set off against current year
income from trading business as per section 72(1),
since the eight year time limit as specified under
section 72(3), within which set-off is permitted, has
not expired. 5,000 40,000
Income from speculative business B 5,000
Less: Loss of ` 25,000 from speculative business A
set-off as per section 73(1) to the extent of ` 5,000 5,000 Nil
Balance loss of ` 20,000 from speculative business A
to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27 as per section
73(2)
Loss of ` 20,000 from specified business covered
under section 35AD to be carried forward for set-
off against income from specified business as per
section 73A.
Capital Gains
Long term capital gain on sale of urban land 2,00,000
Less: Long term capital loss on sale of shares (STT
not paid) set-off as per section 74(1)] 75,000
Less: Long-term capital loss on sale of listed shares
on which STT is paid can also be set-off as per
section 74(1), since long-term capital arising on sale
of such shares is taxable under section 112A 1,02,000 23,000
Total Income 1,63,000
Items eligible for carried forward to A.Y.2026-27
Particulars
`
Loss from House property 50,000
As per section 71(3A), loss from house property can be set-off
against any other head of income to the extent of ` 2,00,000
since Mr. Aditya is exercising the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
As per section 71B, balance loss not set-off can be carried
forward to the next year for set-off against income from house
property of that year. It can be carried forward for a maximum of
eight assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2033-34, in this case.
Loss from speculative business A 20,000
Loss from speculative business can be set-off only against profits
from any other speculation business. As per section 73(2), balance
loss not set-off can be carried forward to the next year for set-off
against speculative business income of that year. Such loss can be
carried forward for a maximum of four assessment years i.e., upto
A.Y.2029-30, in this case, as specified under section 73(4).
Loss from specified business 20,000
Loss from specified business under section 35AD can be set-off
only against profits of any other specified business. If loss cannot
be so set-off, the same has to be carried forward to the
5.37
FORWARD OF LOSSES
subsequent year for set off against income from specified
business, if any, in that year. As per section 73A(2), such loss can
be carried forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of any
specified business.
Mr. Aditya is entitled to deduction u/s 35AD, since he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A). He can, accordingly, carry
forward loss from such business indefinitely for set off against
profits of any other specified business.
Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses 2,000
Losses from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses
(current year or brought forward) can be set-off only against
income from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses.
If it cannot be so set-off, it has to be carried forward to the next
year for set-off against income from the activity of owning and
maintaining race horses, if any, in that year. It can be carried
forward for a maximum of four assessment years, i.e., upto
A.Y.2027-28, in this case, as specified under section 74A(3).
6. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. Garg for the A.Y. 2025-26
` `
Particulars
(i) Income from salary 15,000
(ii) Profits and gains of business or profession 66,000
Less: Unabsorbed depreciation brought forward from
A.Y.2024-25 (Unabsorbed depreciation can be
set-off against any head of income other than
“salary”) 11,000 55,000
(iii) Capital gains
Long-term capital gain on sale of land 10,800
Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss [Short-
term capital loss can be set-off against both
short-term capital gains and long-term capital
gains as per section 74(1)] 9,800 1,000
Gross Total Income 71,000
Amount of loss to be carried forward to A.Y.2026-27
`
Particulars
(1) Loss from speculative business [to be carried forward 22,000
as per section 73]
[Loss from a speculative business can be set off only
against income from another speculative business. Since
there is no income from speculative business in the current
year, the entire loss of ` 22,000 brought forward from
A.Y.2024-25 has to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27 for
set-off against speculative business income of that year. It
may be noted that speculative business loss can be carried
forward for a maximum of four years as per section 73(4),
i.e., upto A.Y.2028-29]
(2) Loss on maintenance of race horses [to be carried 15,000
forward as per section 74A]
[As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred in the activity of
owning and maintaining race horses in any assessment
year cannot be set-off against income from any other
source other than the activity of owning and maintaining
race horses. Such loss can be carried forward for a
maximum of four assessment years i.e., upto A.Y.2029-30]
(3) Loss from gambling can neither be set-off nor be
carried forward.
7. Computation of total income of Mr. Srivatsan for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars
` `
Salaries
Income from salaries 2,20,000
Less: Loss from house property since Mr. Srivatsan
has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A) 1,90,000 30,000
Profits and gains of business or profession
Income from speculation business 30,000
Less: Loss from cloth business of ` 2,40,000 set off
to the extent of ` 30,000 30,000 Nil
5.39
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Capital gains
Long-term capital gains from sale of urban land 2,50,000
Less: Set-off of balance loss of ` 2,10,000 from cloth
business 2,10,000 40,000
Income from other sources
Income from betting 45,000
Gross Total Income 1,15,000
Less: Deduction under section 80C (life insurance
premium paid) [See Note (iv) below] 30,000
Total income 85,000
Losses to be carried forward:
Particulars
`
(1) Loss from cloth business (` 2,40,000 – ` 30,000 – ` 2,10,000) Nil
(2) Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD 20,000
Notes:
(i) Loss from specified business covered by section 35AD can be set-off
only against profits and gains of any other specified business.
Therefore, such loss cannot be set off against any other income. The
unabsorbed loss has to be carried forward for set-off against profits and
gains of any specified business in the following year. Mr. Srivatsan is
entitled to deduction u/s 35AD, since he has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). Therefore, he can carry forward loss of ` 20,000 from
specified business referred u/s 35AD indefinitely for set off against
profits of any specified business.
(ii) Business loss cannot be set off against salary income. However, the
balance business loss of ` 2,10,000 (` 2,40,000 – ` 30,000 set-off against
income from speculation business) can be set-off against long-term
capital gains of ` 2,50,000 from sale of urban land. Consequently, the
taxable long-term capital gains would be ` 40,000.
(iii) Loss from card games can neither be set off against any other income,
nor can be carried forward.
(iv) For providing deduction under Chapter VI-A, gross total income has to
be reduced by the amount of long-term capital gains and casual
income. Therefore, the deduction under section 80C in respect of life
insurance premium of ` 45,000 paid has to be restricted to ` 30,000 [i.e.,
Gross Total Income of ` 1,15,000 – ` 40,000 (LTCG) – ` 45,000 (Casual
income)]. Mr. Srivatsan is entitled to deduction u/s 80C, since he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
(v) Income from betting is chargeable at a flat rate of 30% under section
115BB and no expenditure or allowance can be allowed as deduction
from such income, nor can any loss be set-off against such income.
8. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajat for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
1. Income from house property
House No.1 72,000
House No.2 (-) 30,000 42,000
2. Profits and gains of business or
profession
Profit from leather business 1,00,000
Bad debts recovered taxable under section
41(4) 35,000
1,35,000
Less: Current year loss of textile business (-) 40,000
95,000
Less: Brought forward business loss of
textile business for A.Y.2020-21 set off
against the business income of current year 95,000 Nil
3. Capital Gains
Short-term capital gain 60,000
Gross Total Income 1,02,000
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A
Under section 80C – LIC premium paid -
(not available since he is paying tax under
the default tax regime)
Total Income 1,02,000
5.41
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Statement of losses to be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27
Particulars
`
Brought forward chemical business loss of A.Y. 2021-22 to be 50,000
carried forward u/s 72
Long term capital loss of A.Y. 2025-26 to be carried forward u/s 74 35,000
Notes:
(1) Share of profit from firm of ` 16,550 is exempt under section 10(2A).
(2) Long-term capital loss cannot be set-off against short-term capital
gains. Therefore, it has to be carried forward to the next year to be set-
off against long-term capital gains of that year.
9. Computation of Gross Total Income of Ms. Geeta
for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Profits and gains of business and profession
Salary received as a partner from a partnership firm is taxable 7,50,000
under the head “Profits and gains of business and profession”
Less: B/f business loss of A.Y. 2023-24 ` 12,50,000 to be set-
off to the extent of ` 7,50,000 7,50,000
Nil
(Balance b/f business loss of ` 5,00,000 can be carried forward
to the next year)
Capital Gains
Long term capital gain on sale of land 5,00,000
Less: Long-term capital loss on shares on STT paid
(See Note 2 below) 3,00,000 2,00,000
Income from other sources
Cash gift received from friends - since the value of 51,000
cash gift exceeds ` 50,000, the entire sum is taxable
Dividend income from a domestic company is fully
taxable in the hands of shareholders 55,000 1,06,000
Gross Total Income 3,06,000
Notes:
1. Balance brought forward business loss of assessment year 2023-24 of
` 5,00,000 has to be carried forward to the next year.
2. Long-term capital loss on sale of shares on which STT is paid at the time
of acquisition and sale can be set-off against long-term capital gain on
sale of land since long-term capital gain on sale of shares (STT paid) is
taxable under section 112A. Therefore, it can be set-off against long-
term capital gain on sale of land as per section 70(3).
10. Computation of Gross Total Income of Mr. P for the A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
` `
(i) Income from salary 18,000
(ii) Income from House Property
Net Annual Value 70,000
Less: Deduction under section 24 (30% of
` 70,000) 21,000 49,000
(iii) Income from business and profession
(a) Income from business 80,000
Less : Current year depreciation 8,000
72,000
Less : Unabsorbed depreciation 9,000 63,000
(b) Income from speculative business 12,000
Less : B/f loss of ` 16,000 from
speculative business set-off to the
extent of ` 12,000 12,000 Nil
(Balance loss of ` 4,000 (i.e. ` 16,000 –
` 12,000) can be carried forward to the next
year)
(iv) Income from capital gain
Long-term capital gain on sale of land 15,800
Less: Brought forward short-term capital loss 7,800 8,000
Gross total income 1,38,000
5.43
FORWARD OF LOSSES
Amount of loss to be carried forward to the next year
Particulars
`
Loss from speculative business (to be carried forward as per 4,000
section 73)
Loss on maintenance of race horses (to be carried forward as 9,000
per section 74A)
Notes:
(i) Loss on gambling can neither be set-off nor be carried forward.
(ii) As per section 74A(3), the loss incurred on maintenance of race horses
cannot be set-off against income from any other source other than the
activity of owning and maintaining race horses. Such loss can be carried
forward for a maximum period of 4 assessment years.
(iii) Brought forward speculative business loss can be set off only against
income from speculative business of the current year and the balance
loss can be carried forward to A.Y. 2026-27. It may be noted that
speculative business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of four
years as per section 73(4).
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CHAPT ER
6 a
DEDUCTIONS FROM
GROSS TOTAL INCOME
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to –
 appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income
under the default tax regime under section 115BAC;
 appreciate the types of deductions allowable from gross total income,
if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) and is paying tax under
the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act;
 identify the assessees eligible for deduction under various sections;
 compute deductions in respect of payments, applying the provisions
under the relevant sections;
 compute deductions in respect of certain income, applying the
provisions under the relevant sections;
 compute the deduction allowable in the case of a person with disability;
 compute the deduction available under section 10AA for units
established in SEZs considering the conditions specified thereunder.
eht
rednu
emocnI
latoT
ssorG
morf
snoitcudeD
WEIVREVO
RETPAHC
)tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
,.e.i(
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
AA01
noitces
rednu
noitcudeD
A- IV retpahC
rednu snoitcudeD
rehtO
rehto
fo tcepser
ni
snoitcudeD
niatrec
fo tcepser
ni
snoitcudeD
niatrec
fo tcepser
ni
snoitcudeD
snoitcudeD
emocni
semocni
stnemyap
seeyolpme
wen
fo tnemyolpme
fo
tcepser
nI
– AAJJ08
noitceS
.cte
FP
,FPP
,PIL fo tcepser
nI –C08
noitceS
stnetap
no
ytlayor
fo
tcepser
nI
– BRR08
noitceS
sdnuf
noisnep
niatrec
ot noitubirtnoc
fo tcepser
nI –CCC08
noitceS
srohtua
fo .cte
emocni
ytlayor
fo
tcepser
nI
– BQQ08
noitceS
fo
emehcs
noisnep
ot noitubirtnoc
fo tcepser
nI – DCC08
noitceS
skoob
txet
naht
rehto
skoob
niatrec
fo
tnemnrevoG
lartneC
fo
emehcs
htapingA
ot noitubirtnoc
fo tcepser
nI – HCC08
noitceS
muimerp
ecnarusni
lacidem
fo tcepser
nI –
D08
noitceS
delbasid
tnedneped
a fo tnemtaert
lacidem
gnidulcni
ecnanetniam
fo tceper
nI – DD08
noitceS
tnemlia
ro
esaesid
deificeps
fo .cte
tnemtaert
lacidem
rof diap
tnuoma
fo tcepser
nI – BDD08
noitceS
noitacude
rehgih
rof
nekat naol
no
tseretni
fo tcepser
nI –
E08
noitceS
laudividni
na yb ytreporp
esuoh
fo noitisiuqca
rof deworrob
naol
no
elbayap
tseretni
fo tcepser
nI –
AEE08/EE08
noitceS
elcihev
cirtcele
fo esahcrup
rof
nekat
naol
no elbayap
tseretni
fo tcepser
nI – BEE08
noitceS
stisoped
no
tseretni
fo
tcepser
nI – ATT08
noitceS
.cte
snoitutsni
elbatirahc
,sdnuf
niatrec ot
snoitanod
fo tcepser
nI –
G08
noitceS
tnuocca
sgnivas
ni
no
tseretni
fo
tcepser
nI – BTT08
noitceS
diap
tner
fo tcepser
nI – GG08
noitceS
snezitic
roines
fo esac
ni stisoped
tnempoleved
larur
dna
hcraeser
cifitneics
rof snoitanod
fo tcepser
nI – AGG08
noitceS
a fo
esac
ni noitcudeD
–
U08 noitceS
seitrap
lacitilop
ot seinapmoc
yb
nevig snoitubirtnoc
fo tcepser
nI – BGG08
noitceS
ytilibasid
htiw
nosrep
seitrap
lacitilop
ot nosrep
yna
yb
nevig snoitubirtnoc
fo tcepser
nI– CGG08
noitceS
lartneC[
)2(HCC08
,]tnemnrevoG
lartneC
fo
emehcs
noisnep
ot noitubirtnoc
s’reyolpmE[
)2(DCC08
s/u snoitcuded
ylnO
–
etoN
eessessa
elbigile
eht
fi
elbaliava
eb
dluow
AAJJ08
noitces
dna
]dnuF
suproC
reevingA
ni tnuocca
s’eessessa
ot noitubirtnoc
s’tnemnrevoG
.emiger
xat tluafed
eht
rednu
CAB511
s/u
xat fo
setar
lanoissecnoc
ta
xat
syap
6. 2 INCOME TAX LAW
1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
The various items of income referred to in the different clauses of section 10 are
excluded from the total income of an assessee. These incomes are known as
exempted incomes. “Exemption” means exclusion. A particular income exempt
from tax under section 10 shall not enter into the computation of taxable income.
However, there are certain items of income referred to in section 10 which are not
exempted if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under the default tax
regime u/s 115BAC, namely,
10(5) Leave travel concession
10(13A) House Rent Allowance
10(14) Special Allowances except -
(a) Travelling allowance
(b) Daily allowance
(c) Conveyance allowance
(d) Transport allowance to blind/deaf and dumb/orthopedically
handicapped employee
10(17) Daily allowance/Constituency allowance received by any Member of
Parliament or of State Legislatures
10(32) Exemption in respect of income of minor child included in assessee’s
total income
“Deduction” in relation to Chapter VI-A and section 10AA refers to the amount that
is reduced from gross total income to arrive at the total income. There are incomes
which are included in gross total income but are wholly or partly allowed as
deduction under Chapter VI-A in computation of total income, if the assessee has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A) and pays tax as per the optional tax regime under the normal
provisions of the Act.
Deduction is allowed on specific investments or expenses incurred by the taxpayer
to promote the culture of savings and investments. This could include medical
expenditure, donations made to charities, investments made in specific avenues
such as Public Provident Fund (PPF), National Pension Scheme (NPS) etc.
However, if the assessee pays concessional rates of tax under default tax regime
u/s 115BAC, only deduction in respect of employer’s contribution to NPS u/s
80CCD(2), Central Government’s contribution to Agnipath Scheme u/s 80CCH(2)
and deduction in respect of employment of new employees u/s 80JJAA would be
allowed to the assessee. He cannot claim deduction under any other provision in
Chapter VI-A under the default tax regime.
Section 10AA also provides for a deduction in respect of units established in SEZ
from the total income of the assessee. It is available only if the assessee has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). This deduction is not available if the assessee pays
concessional rates of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.
The tax liability is calculated on the “total income” which is arrived after reducing
permissible deductions from gross total income.
Students should note this very important difference between exemption under
section 10 and the deduction under Chapter VI-A/10AA.
Difference between Deduction under Chapter VI-A & section 10AA and
Exemption under section 10
Particulars Deduction Exemption
(in relation to Chapter VI-A and (contained in section 10)
section 10AA)
Meaning Investments/ contributions in The incomes which are
certain instruments (as prescribed exempt under section 10 will
under the Income-tax Act). not be included in
Payments made for certain computing gross total
purposes. income.
Relevant Sections 80C to 80U in Chapter VI-A Section 10 of the Income-
Sections and section 10AA of the Income-tax tax Act.
Act.
Manner of First included in the Gross Total Not included in the Gross
treatment Income and then deductions will be Total Income.
allowed from Gross Total Income.
The important point to be noted here is that if there is no gross total income, then
no deductions will be permissible. This Chapter contains deduction under Chapter
VI-A which includes deductions in respect of certain payments, deductions in
respect of certain incomes, deductions in respect of other income and other
deductions. It also includes deduction under section 10AA.
Section 80A
(i) Section 80A(1) provides that in computing the total income of an assessee,
there shall be allowed from his gross total income, the deductions specified
in sections 80C to 80U if the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) According to section 80A(2), the aggregate amount of the deductions under
this chapter shall not, in any case, exceed the gross total income of the
assessee. Therefore, the total income after deductions will either be positive
or nil. It cannot be negative due to deductions.
An assessee cannot have a loss as a result of the deduction under Chapter
VI-A and claim to carry forward the same for the purpose of set-off against
his income in the subsequent year.
(iii) Section 80A(3) provides that in the case of AOP/BOI exercising the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), if
any deduction is admissible under section 80G/80GGA/80GGC1, no deduction
under the same section shall be made in computing the total income of a
member of the AOP or BOI in relation to the share of such member in the
income of the AOP or BOI.
(iv) The profits and gains allowed as deduction under section 10AA or under any
provision of Chapter VI-A under the heading "C.-Deductions in respect of
certain incomes" in any assessment year, shall not be allowed as deduction
under any other provision of the Act for such assessment year [Section
80A(4)].
(v) The deduction, referred to in (iv) above, shall not exceed the profits and gains
of the undertaking or unit or enterprise or eligible business, as the case may
be [Section 80A(4)].
180-IA/80-IB/80-IE (these sections will be dealt with at the Final level)
(vi) No deduction under any of the provisions referred to in (iv) above, shall be
allowed if the deduction has not been claimed in the return of income
[Section 80A(5)].
(vii) The transfer price of goods and services between such undertaking or unit or
enterprise or eligible business and any other business of the assessee shall
be determined at the market value of such goods or services as on the date
of transfer [Section 80A(6)].
(viii) For this purpose, the expression "market value" has been defined to mean,-
(a) in relation to any goods or services sold or supplied, the price that such
goods or services would fetch if these were sold by the undertaking or
unit or enterprise or eligible business in the open market, subject to
statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;
(b) in relation to any goods or services acquired, the price that such goods
or services would cost if these were acquired by the undertaking or unit
or enterprise or eligible business from the open market, subject to
statutory or regulatory restrictions, if any;
(ix) Where a deduction under any provision of this Chapter under the heading “C
– Deductions in respect of certain incomes” is claimed and allowed to an
assessee exercising the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A), in respect of the profits of such specified
business for any assessment year, no deduction under section 35AD is
permissible in relation to such specified business for the same or any other
assessment year.
In short, once the assessee has claimed the benefit of deduction under
section 35AD for a particular year in respect of a specified business, he cannot
claim benefit under Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in
respect of certain incomes” for the same or any other year and vice versa.
Further, if the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section
115BAC, neither deduction under section 35AD nor deductions under Chapter
VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect of certain incomes” would
be available to him.
Section 80AB
Deductions specified in Chapter VI-A under the heading “C.-Deductions in respect
of certain incomes”, shall be allowed only to the extent such income computed in
accordance with the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is included in the gross
total income of the assessee.
Section 80AC: Furnishing return of income on or before due
date mandatory for claiming deduction under Chapter VI-A
under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain
incomes"
(i) Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of return of income on or
before the due date specified under section 139(1), as a pre-condition
for availing benefit of deductions under any provision of Chapter VI-A
under the heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain incomes”.
Table showing the deductions contained in Chapter VI-A under the
heading “C. – Deductions in respect of certain income”
Section Deduction
80-IA Deductions in respect of profits and gains from undertakings or
enterprises engaged in infrastructure development/ operation/
maintenance, generation/ transmission/ distribution of power etc.
80-IAB Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an
undertaking or enterprise engaged in development of SEZ
80-IAC Deduction in respect of profits and gains derived by an eligible
start-up from an eligible business
80-IB Deduction in respect of profits and gains from certain industrial
undertakings other than infrastructure development
undertakings
80-IBA Deduction in respect of profits and gains from housing
projects/rental housing projects
80-IE Deduction in respect of profits and gains from manufacture or
production of eligible article or thing, substantial expansion to
manufacture or produce any eligible article or thing or carrying
on of eligible business in North-Eastern States
80JJA Deduction in respect of profits and gains from business of
collecting and processing of bio-degradable waste
80JJAA Deduction in respect of employment of new employees
80LA Deduction in respect of certain income of Offshore Banking
Units and International Financial Services Centre
80M Deduction in respect of certain inter-corporate dividends
80P Deduction in respect of income of co-operative societies
80PA Deduction in respect of certain income of Producer Companies
80QQB Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors of certain
books other than text books
80RRB Deduction in respect of royalty on patents
(ii) The effect of this provision is that, in case of failure to file return of income
on or before the stipulated due date, the undertakings would lose the benefit
of deduction under these sections.
Note: The deductions under section 80-IA to 80-IE, 80JJA, 80LA, 80M, 80P and 80PA
in respect of certain incomes will be dealt with in detail at the Final Level.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-tax
Act, 1961:
(a) For grant of deduction under section 80JJAA, filing of audit report in prescribed
form is must for a corporate assessee; filing of return within the due date laid
down in section 139(1) is not required.
(b) Filing of belated return under section 139(4) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 will
debar an assessee from claiming deduction under section 80QQB if the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A) (i.e., he pays tax under the optional tax regime).
SOLUTION
(a) The statement is not correct. Section 80AC stipulates compulsory filing of
return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1), as
a pre-condition for availing the benefit of deduction, inter alia, under section
80JJAA.
(b) The statement is correct. As per section 80AC, the assessee has to furnish
his return of income on or before the due date specified under section 139(1),
to be eligible to claim deduction under, inter alia, section 80QQB.
Section 80B(5)
“Gross total income” means the total income computed in accordance with the
provisions of the Act without making any deduction under Chapter VI-A.
“Computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act” implies—
(i) that deductions under appropriate computation section have already been
given effect to;
(ii) that income of other persons, if includible under sections 60 to 64, has been
included;
(iii) the intra head and/or inter head losses have been adjusted; and
(iv) that unabsorbed brought forward business losses, unabsorbed depreciation
etc., have been set-off.
Two types of deductions are allowable from Gross Total Income - Deductions under
Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA which are discussed in this chapter.
Deductions from Gross Total Income
Deductions under Chapter VI-A
2. Deductions in 5. Other 6. Deduction
3. Deductions in 4. Deductions
respect of certain Deductions under
respect of in respect of
payments section 10AA
certain inco mes other incomes
2. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN
PAYMENTS
2.1 Deduction in respect of investment in specified assets
[Section 80C]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Deduction in respect of investment/ contributions
Section 80C provides for a deduction from the Gross Total Income of savings
in specified modes of investments. The deduction under section 80C is
available only to an individual or HUF exercising the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is not allowable
under the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
The maximum permissible deduction under section 80C is ` 1,50,000. The
following are the investments/ contributions eligible for deduction –
(1) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of
the individual for participation in the Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971. In case
of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any member.
(2) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund
Contributions in the name of the individual, his or her spouse or any child of
the individual for participation in any Unit linked Insurance Plan of the LIC
Mutual Fund. In case of a HUF, the contribution can be in the name of any
member.
(3) Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy
Premium paid on insurance on the life of the individual, spouse or any child
(minor or major) and in the case of HUF, any member thereof. This will include
a life policy and an endowment policy.
The following is a tabular summary of the deduction allowable under section
80C vis-à-vis the date of issue of such policies –
Deduction u/s 80C
In respect of Premium paid to the extent of 20% of “actual capital
policies issued sum assured”.
before 31.3.2012
In respect of Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual capital
policies issued on sum assured” i.e., minimum amount assured under the
or after 1.4.2012 policy on happening of the insured event at any time
but before during the term of the policy, not taking into account
1.4.2013 –
(i) the value of any premium agreed to be returned;
or
(ii) any benefit by way of bonus or otherwise over
and above the sum actually assured, which is to
be or may be received under the policy by any
person.
In respect of (a) Where the insurance is on the life of a
policies issued on person with disability or severe disability as
or after 1.4.2013 referred to in section 80U or a person
suffering from disease or ailment as
specified under section 80DDB.
Premium paid to the extent of 15% of “actual
capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as
described above].
(b) Where the insurance is on the life of any
person, other than mentioned in (a) above
Premium paid to the extent of 10% of “actual
capital sum assured” [has the same meaning as
described above].
ILLUSTRATION 2
Compute the eligible deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26 in respect of
life insurance premium paid by Mr. Ganesh during the P.Y.2024-25, the details
of which are given hereunder, if Mr. Ganesh has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A) –
Date of Person insured Actual Insurance
issue of capital sum premium paid
policy assured (`) during 2024-25
(`)
(i) 30/3/2012 Self 9,00,000 48,000
(ii) 1/5/2018 Spouse 1,50,000 20,000
(iii) 1/6/2021 Handicapped son 4,00,000 80,000
(section 80U disability)
SOLUTION
Date of Person Actual Insurance Deduct- Remark
issue of insured capital premium ion u/s (restricted
policy sum paid during 80C for to % of
assured 2024-25 A.Y.2025- sum
(`) (`) 26 assured)
(`) (`)
(i) 30/3/2012 Self 9,00,000 48,000 48,000 20%
(ii) 1/5/2018 Spouse 1,50,000 20,000 15,000 10%
(iii) 1/6/2021 Handicapped 4,00,000 80,000 60,000 15%
son (section
80U disability)
Total 1,23,000
ILLUSTRATION 3
What would your answer if Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under
section 115BAC?
SOLUTION
If Mr. Ganesh pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC, he
would not be eligible for deduction under section 80C.
(4) Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity
Premium paid to effect and keep in force a contract for a deferred annuity on
the life of the individual and/or his or her spouse or any child, provided such
contract does not contain any provision for the exercise by the insured of an
option to receive cash payments in lieu of the payment of the annuity.
It is pertinent to note here that a contract for a deferred annuity need not
necessarily be with an insurance company. It follows therefore that such a
contract can be entered into with any person.
(5) Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government employee
for securing a deferred annuity
Amount deducted by or on behalf of the Government from the salary of a
Government employee in accordance with the conditions of his service for
securing a deferred annuity or making provision for his spouse or children.
The excess, if any, over one-fifth of the salary is to be ignored.
(6) Contribution to SPF/PPF/RPF
Contributions to any provident fund to which the Provident Funds Act, 1925
applies and recognized provident fund qualifies for deduction under section 80C.
Contribution made to any Provident Fund set up by the Central Government
and notified in his behalf (i.e., the Public Provident Fund established under
the Public Provident Fund Scheme, 1968) also qualifies for deduction under
section 80C. Such contribution can be made in the name of the individual, his
spouse and any child of the individual; and any member of the family, in case
of a HUF. The maximum limit for deposit in PPF is ` 1,50,000 in a year.
ILLUSTRATION 4
An individual assessee, resident in India, has made the following
deposit/payment during the previous year 2024-25:
Particulars `
Contribution to the public provident fund 1,50,000
Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse (policy taken 25,000
on 1.4.2018) (Assured value ` 2,20,000)
What is the deduction allowable under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26 if the
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)?
SOLUTION
Computation of deduction under section 80C for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars `
Deposit in public provident fund 1,50,000
Insurance premium paid on the life of the spouse
(Maximum 10% of the assured value ` 2,20,000, as the policy is
taken after 31.3.2012) 22,000
Total 1,72,000
However, the maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C is 1,50,000
restricted to
(7) Contribution to approved superannuation Fund
Contribution by an employee to an approved superannuation fund qualifies
for deduction under section 80C.
(8) Any sum paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account
Subscription to any such security of the Central Government or any such
deposit scheme as the Central Government as may notify in the Official
Gazette. Accordingly, Sukanya Samriddhi Scheme has been notified to
provide that any sum paid or deposited during the previous year in the said
Scheme, by an individual in the name of –
(a) any girl child of the individual; or
(b) any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian
would be eligible for deduction under section 80C.
Exemption on payment from Sukanya Samriddhi Account
[Section 10(11A)]
Section 10(11A) provides that any payment from an account opened in
accordance with the Sukanya Samriddhi Account Rules, 2014, made under the
Government Savings Bank Act, 1873, shall not be included in the total income
of the assessee. Accordingly, the interest accruing on deposits in, and
withdrawals from any account under the said scheme would be exempt.
(9) Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII
Subscription to any Savings Certificates under the Government Savings
Certificates Act, 1959 notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette (i.e. National Savings Certificate (VIII Issue) issued under the
Government Savings Certificates Act, 1959).
(10) Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC
Contributions to approved annuity plans of LIC (New Jeevan Dhara and New
Jeevan Akshay, New Jeevan Dhara I and New Jeevan Akshay I, II and III) or any
other insurer as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(11) Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI
Subscription to any units of any mutual fund or from the Administrator or the
specified company under any plan formulated in accordance with such
scheme notified by the Central Government;
(12) Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI
Contribution by an individual to a pension fund set up by any Mutual Fund
or by the Administrator or the specified company as the Central Government
may specify (i.e., UTI-Retirement Benefit Pension Fund set up by the specified
company referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of
Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002 as a pension fund).
(13) Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit
Scheme, 2008
Subscription to any deposit scheme or contribution to any pension fund set
up by the National Housing Bank i.e., National Housing Bank (Tax Saving)
Term Deposit Scheme, 2008.
(14) Subscription to notified deposit scheme
Subscription to any such deposit scheme of
• a public sector company which is engaged in providing long-term
finance for construction, or purchase of houses in India for residential
purposes; or
• any such deposit s cheme of any authority constituted in India by or
under any law enacted either for the purpose of dealing with and
satisfying the need for housing accommodation or for the purpose of
planning, development or improvement of cities, towns and villages or
for both.
The deposit scheme should be notified by the Central Government, for
example, public deposit scheme of HUDCO.
(15) Payment of tuition fees to any university, college, school or other
educational institution within India for full-time education for
maximum 2 children
Payment of tuition fees by an individual assessee at the time of admission or
thereafter to any university, college, school or other educational
institutions within India for the purpose of full-time education of any two
children of the individual. This benefit is only for the amount of tuition fees
for full-time education and shall not include any payment towards
development fees or donation or payment of similar nature and payment
made for education to any institution situated outside India.
(16) Repayment of housing loan including stamp duty, registration fee and
other expenses
Any payment made towards the cost of purchase or construction of a new
residential house property. The income from such property –
(i) should be chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house
property”;
(ii) would have been chargeable to tax under the head “Income from house
property” had it not been used for the assessee’s own residence.
The approved types of payments are as follows:
(a) Any instalment or part payment of the amount due under any self-
financing or other schemes of any development authority, Housing
Board or other authority engaged in the construction and sale of house
property on ownership basis; or
(b) Any instalment or part payment of the amount due to any company or
a cooperative society of which the assessee is a shareholder or member
towards the cost of house allotted to him; or
(c) Repayment of amount borrowed by the assessee from:
I The Central Government or any State Government;
II Any bank including a co-operative bank;
III The Life Insurance Corporation;
IV The National Housing Bank;
V Any public company formed and registered in India with the main
object of carrying on the business of providing long-term finance
for construction or purchase of houses in India for residential
purposes which is eligible for deduction under section 36(1)(viii);
VI Any company in which the public are substantially interested or
any cooperative society engaged in the business of financing the
construction of houses;
VII The assessee’s employer, where such employer is an authority or
a board or a corporation or any other body established or
constituted under a Central or State Act;
VIII the assessee’s employer where such employer is a public company
or public sector company or a university established by law or a
college affiliated to such university or a local authority or a co-
operative society.
(d) Stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses for the purposes of
transfer of such house property to the assessee.
Inadmissible payments: However, the following amounts do not qualify for
rebate:
(A) admission fee, cost of share and initial deposit which a shareholder of
a company or a member of a co-operative society has to pay for
becoming a shareholder or member; or
(B) the cost of any addition or alteration or renovation or repair of the
house property after the issue of the completion certificate in respect
of the house property or after the house has been occupied by the
assessee or any person on his behalf or after it has been let out; or
(C) any expenditure in respect of which deduction is allowable under
section 24.
(17) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures
Subscription to equity shares or debentures forming part of any eligible issue
of capital approved by the Board on an application made by a public company
or as subscription to any eligible issue of capital by any public financial
institution in the prescribed form.
A lock-in period of three years is provided in respect of such equity shares or
debentures. In case of any sale or transfer of shares or debentures within
three years of the date of acquisition, the aggregate amount of deductions
allowed in respect of such equity shares or debentures in the previous year
or years preceding the previous year in which such sale or transfer has taken
place shall be deemed to be the income of the assessee of such previous year
and shall be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous
year.
A person shall be treated as having acquired any shares or debentures on the
date on which his name is entered in relation to those shares or debentures
in the register of members or of debenture-holders, as the case may be, of
the public company.
(18) Subscription to certain units of mutual fund
Subscription to any units of any mutual fund and approved by the Board on
an application made by such mutual fund in the prescribed form.
It is necessary that such units should be subscribed only in the eligible issue
of capital of any company.
(19) Investment in five year term deposit
Investment in term deposit
(i) for a period of not less than five years with a scheduled bank; and
(ii) which is in accordance with a scheme framed and notified by the Central
Government in the Official Gazette
qualifies as an eligible investment for availing deduction under section 80C.
The maximum limit for investment in term deposit is ` 1,50,000.
Scheduled bank means -
(1) the State Bank of India (SBI)
(2) a subsidiary bank of SBI, or
(3) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act
(4) any other bank, being a bank included in the Second Schedule to the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934.
(20) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD
Subscription to such bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government
may notify in the Official Gazette) qualifies for deduction under section 80C.
(21) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit
Investment in five year time deposit in an account under Post Office Time
Deposit Rules, 1981 qualifies for deduction under section 80C.
(22) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004
Deposit in an account under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004
qualifies for deduction under section 80C.
(23) Contribution to additional account under NPS
Contribution by a Central Government employee to additional account under
NPS (specified account) referred to in section 80CCD for a fixed period of not
less than 3 years and which is in accordance with the scheme notified by the
Central Government for this purpose qualifies for deduction under section
80C. It may be noted that only the contribution to the additional account
under NPS will qualify for deduction under section 80C.
There are two types of NPS account i.e., Tier I and Tier II, to which an individual
can contribute. Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution
to individual pension account [Tier I account] under the NPS [referred to in
section 20(2)(a) of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
Act, 2013 (PFRDA)] whereas deduction under section 80C is allowable in
respect of contribution by Central Government employee to additional
account [Tier II account] of NPS [referred to in section 20(3) of the PFRDA],
which does not qualify for deduction under section 80CCD. Thus, Tier II
account is the additio nal account under NPS, contribution to which
would qualify for deduction under section 80C only in the hands of a
Central Government employee.
(ii) Termination of Insurance Policy or Unit Linked Insurance Plan or transfer
of House Property or withdrawal of deposit:
Where, in any previous year, an assessee:
(i) terminates his contract of insurance referred to in (3) above, by notice
to that effect or where the contract ceases to be in force by reason of
not paying the premium, by not reviving the contract of insurance, -
(a) in case of any single premium policy, within two years after the
date of commencement of insurance; or
(b) in any other case, before premiums have been paid for two years;
or
(ii) terminates his participation in any Unit Linked Insurance Plan referred
to in (1) or (2) above, by notice to that effect or where he ceases to
participate by reason of failure to pay any contribution, by not reviving
his participation, before contributions in respect of such participation
have been paid for five years, or
(iii) transfers the house property referred to in (16) above, before the expiry
of five years from the end of the financial year in which possession of
such property is obtained by him, or receives back, whether by way of
refund or otherwise, any sum specified in (16) above,
then, no deduction will be allowed to the assessee in respect of sums paid
during such previous year and the total amount of deductions of income
allowed in respect of the previous year or years preceding such previous year,
shall be deemed to be income of the assessee of such previous year and shall
be liable to tax in the assessment year relevant to such previous year.
Further, where any amount is withdrawn by the assessee from his account
under the Senior Citizens Savings Scheme or under the Post Office Time
Deposit Rules before the expiry of a period of 5 years from the date of its
deposit, the amount so withdrawn shall be deemed to be the income of the
assessee of the previous year in which the amount is withdrawn. Accordingly,
the amount so withdrawn would be chargeable to tax in the assessment year
relevant to such previous year. The amount chargeable to tax would also
include that part of the amount withdrawn which represents interest accrued
on the deposit.
However, if any part of the amount relating to interest so received or
withdrawn has been subject to tax in any of the earlier years, such amount
shall not be taxed again.
If any amount has been received by the nominee or legal heir of the assessee,
on the death of such assessee, the amount would not be chargeable to tax.
However, if the amount relating to interest on deposit was not included in the
total income of the assessee in any of any earlier years, then, such interest would
be chargeable to tax.
Summary of investment/ contributions eligible for deduction u/s 80C
S. Investment/ contributions
No.
(i) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan 1971
In case of individual – in the name of individual, his or her spouse or
any child of the individual
In case of HUF – in the name of any member of HUF
(ii) Contribution in Unit-linked Insurance Plan of LIC Mutual Fund
In case of individual – In the name of individual, his or her spouse or
any child of the individual
In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF
(iii) Premium paid in respect of Life Insurance policy
In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse or
any child of the individual
In case of HUF – on the life of any member of HUF
(iv) Premium paid in respect of a contract for deferred annuity
In case of individual – on the life of individual, his or her spouse or
any child of the individual
(v) Any sum deducted from the salary payable of a Government
employee for securing a deferred annuity [excess over 1/5th of the
salary to be ignored]
(vi) Contribution to PPF
In case of individual – in the name of Individual, his or her spouse or
any child of the individual
In case of HUF – In the name of any member of HUF
(vii) Contribution to SPF/RPF
(viii) Contribution to approved superannuation Fund
(ix) Paid or deposited in Sukanya Samriddhi Account
(a) for any girl child of the individual; or
(b) for any girl child for whom such individual is the legal guardian
(x) Subscription to National Savings Certificates VIII
(xi) Contribution to approved annuity plan of LIC or any other notified
insurer
(xii) Subscription towards notified units of mutual fund or UTI [ELSS]
(xiii) Contribution to notified pension fund set up by mutual fund or UTI
(xiv) Contribution to National Housing Bank (Tax Saving) Term Deposit
Scheme, 2008
(xv) Subscription to notified deposit scheme of public sector co. or
authority constituted in India in relation to housing. For example,
public deposit scheme of HUDCO.
(xvi) Tuition fees to by an individual to any university, college, school or
other educational institution within India for full-time education for
maximum 2 children of the individual.
(xvii) Repayment of housing loan for purchase/ construction of house
property including stamp duty, registration fee and other expenses
for transfer
(xviii) Subscription to certain equity shares or debentures forming part of
any approved eligible issue of capital by a public company or by any
public financial institution
(xix) Units of mutual fund subscribed only in eligible issue of capital of any
company
(xx) Investment in five year term deposit with a scheduled bank
(xxi) Subscription to notified bonds issued by NABARD
(xxii) Investment in five year Post Office time deposit
(xxiii) Deposit in Senior Citizens Savings Scheme Rules, 2004
(xxiv) Contribution to additional account under NPS (Tier II account), in case
of Central Government employee
2.2 Deduction in respect of contribution to certain pension
funds [Section 80CCC]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: Where an assessee, being an individual, has in the previous
year paid or deposited any amount out of his income chargeable to tax to effect
or keep in force a contract for any annuity plan of LIC of India or any other
insurer for receiving pension from the fund set up by LIC or such other insurer,
he shall be allowed a deduction in the computation of his total income.
For this purpose, the interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s
account shall not be reckoned as contribution.
Note: Where any amount paid or deposited by the assessee has been taken
into account for the purposes of this section, a deduction under section 80C
shall not be allowed with reference to such amount.
(ii) Maximum Deduction: The maximum permissible deduction is ` 1,50,000
(Further, the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 prescribed in section 80CCE will
continue to be applicable i.e. the maximum permissible deduction under
sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together is ` 1,50,000).
(iii) Deemed Income: Where any amount standing to the credit of the assessee
in the fund in respect of which a deduction has been allowed, together with
interest or bonus accrued or credited to the assessee’s account is received by
the assessee or his nominee on account of the surrender of the annuity plan
in any previous year or as pension received from the annuity plan, such
amount will be deemed to be the income of the assessee or the nominee in
that previous year in which such withdrawal is made or pension is received. It
will be chargeable to tax as income of that previous year.
2.3 Deduction in respect of contribution to pension scheme
notified by the Central Government [Section 80CCD]
(i) Pension Scheme of Central Government: It is mandatory for persons
entering the service of the Central Government on or after 1st January, 2004,
to contribute 10% of their salary every month towards their pension account.
A matching contribution is required to be made by the Government to the
said account. The benefit of this scheme is also available to individuals
employed by any other employer as well as to self-employed individuals.
(ii) Deduction: Section 80CCD provides deduction in respect of contribution
made to the pension scheme notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, the Central Government has notified the ‘Atal Pension Yojana
(APY)’ as a pension scheme, contribution to which would qualify for deduction
under section 80CCD in the hands of the individual.
(iii) Quantum of deduction:
(a) Section 80CCD(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or
deposited by an employee in his pension account subject to a maximum
of 10% of his salary. The deduction in the case of a self-employed
individual would be restricted to 20% of his gross total income in the
previous year.
Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) would be available to an assessee
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., if he pays tax under the
optional tax regime – the normal provisions of the Act).
Deduction under section 80CCD(1)
An individual
employed by CG
on or after
10% of
01.01.2004
salary
Eligible
An Individual
Assessee
employed by any
other employer
Any other
20% of GTI
individual
(b) Section 80CCD(1B) provides for an additional deduction of up to
` 50,000 in respect of the whole of the amount paid or deposited by an
individual assessee under NPS in the previous year, whether or not any
deduction is allowed u/s 80CCD(1).
Deduction u/s 80CCD(1B) would be available to an assessee
only if he exercises the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A) (i.e., it is available only
if the assessee pays tax under the optional tax regime – normal
provisions of the Act)
(c) Whereas the deduction under section 80CCD(1) is subject to the overall
limit of ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE (i.e., the maximum permissible
deduction under sections 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) put together), the
deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) is in addition to
the overall limit of ` 1.50 lakh provided under section 80CCE.
(d) Under section 80CCD(2), contribution made by the Central Government
or State Government or any other employer in the previous year to the
said account of an employee, is allowed as a deduction in computation
of the total income of the assessee.
(e) The entire employe r’s contribution would be included in the salary of
the employee. However, deduction under section 80CCD(2) would be
restricted to,
- In case of contribution made by the Central Government or State
Government - 14% of salary and
- In case of contribution made by any other employer – 10% of salary
(14% of salary in case assessee is paying tax as per default tax
regime under section 115BAC).
Deduction u/s 80CCD(2) would be available to an assessee
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
1. The limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE does not apply
to employer’s contribution to pension scheme of Central Government
which is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2).
2. No deduction will be allowed under section 80C in respect of
amounts paid or deposited by the assessee, for which deduction has
been allowed under section 80CCD(1) or under section 80CCD(1B).
(iv) Deemed Income: The amount standing to the credit of the assessee in the
pension account (for which deduction has already been claimed by him under
this section) and accretions to such account, shall be taxed as income in the
year in which such amounts are received by the assessee or his nominee on -
(a) closure of the account or
(b) his opting out of the said scheme or
(c) receipt of pension from the annuity plan purchased or taken on such closure
or opting out.
However, the amount received by the nominee on the death of the assessee
under the circumstances referred to in (a) and (b) above, shall not be deemed
to be the income of the nominee.
Further, the assessee shall be deemed not to have received any amount in
the previous year if such amount is used for purchasing an annuity plan in
the same previous year.
1. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an assessee on closure
of his account or on his opting out of the pension scheme
[Section 10(12A)]
(i) As per section 80CCD, any payment from National Pension
System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or his opting
out of the pension scheme is chargeable to tax.
(ii) Section 10(12A) provides that any payment from National
Pension System Trust to an assessee on account of closure or
his opting out of the pension scheme referred to in section
80CCD, to the extent it does not exceed 60% of the total
amount payable to him at the time of closure or his opting out
of the scheme, shall be exempt from tax.
2. Exemption on payment from NPS Trust to an employee on
partial withdrawal [Section 10(12B)]
To provide relief to an employee subscriber of NPS, section 10(12B)
provides that any payment from National Pension System Trust to
an employee under the pension scheme referred to in section
80CCD, on partial withdrawn made out of his account in accordance
with the terms and conditions specified under the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013 and the
regulations made there under, shall be exempt from tax to the extent
it does not exceed 25% of amount of contributions made by him.
2.4 Limit on deductions under sections 80C, 80CCC &
80CCD(1) [Section 80CCE]
This section restricts the aggregate amount of deduction under section 80C, 80CCC
and 80CCD(1) to ` 1,50,000. It may be noted that the deduction of upto
` 50,000 under section 80CCD(1B) and employer’s contribution to pension scheme,
allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(2) in the hands of the employee,
would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 stipulated under section 80CCE.
The following table summarizes the ceiling limit under these sections –
Section Particulars Ceiling limit (`)
80C Investment in LIP, Deposit in PPF/SPF/RPF etc. 1,50,000
80CCC Contribution to certain pension funds 1,50,000
80CCD(1) Contribution to NPS of Government 10% of salary Or
20% of GTI, as
the case may be.
80CCE Aggregate deduction under sections 80C, 1,50,000
80CCC & 80CCD(1)
80CCD(1B) Contribution to NPS notified by the Central 50,000
Government (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000
under section 80CCE)
80CCD(2) Contribution by the Central Government or 14% of salary
State Government to NPS A/c of its
employees (outside the limit of ` 1,50,000
under section 80CCE)
Contribution by any other employer to NPS
A/c of its employees (outside the limit of
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE)
- Where assessee is paying tax as per 10% of salary
optional tax regime
- where assessee is paying tax as per 14% of salary
default tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A)
For computation of limit under section 80CCD(1) and 80CCD(2), salary
includes dearness allowance, if the terms of employment so provide, but
excludes all other allowances and perquisites.
ILLUSTRATION 5
The basic salary of Mr. A is ` 1,00,000 p.m. He is entitled to dearness allowance, which
is 40% of basic salary. 50% of dearness allowance forms part of pay for retirement
benefits. Both Mr. A and his employer, ABC Ltd., contribute 15% of basic salary to
the pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD. Explain the tax treatment in respect
of such contribution in the hands of Mr. A if he has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
What would be your answer if Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC?
SOLUTION
(i) Tax treatment in the hands of Mr. A in respect of employer’s and own
contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD, where
Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A) [i.e., where Mr. A pays tax under the
normal provisions of the Act]
(a) Employer’s contribution to such pension scheme would be treated as
salary since it is specifically included in the definition of “salary” under
section 17(1)(viii). Therefore, ` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of
` 12,00,000, will be included in Mr. A’s salary.
(b) Mr. A’s contribution to pension scheme is allowable as deduction under
section 80CCD(1). However, the deduction is restricted to 10% of salary.
Salary, for this purpose, means basic pay plus dearness allowance, if it
forms part of pay.
Therefore, “salary” for the purpose of deduction under section 80CCD
for Mr. A would be –
Particulars `
Basic salary = ` 1,00,000 × 12 = 12,00,000
Dearness allowance = 40% of ` 12,00,000 = ` 4,80,000
50% of Dearness Allowance forms part of pay = 50% of 2,40,000
` 4,80,000
Salary for the purpose of deduction under section 14,40,000
80CCD
Deduction under section 80CCD(1) is restricted to 10% 1,44,000
of ` 14,40,000 (as against actual contribution of
` 1,80,000, being 15% of basic salary of ` 12,00,000)
As per section 80CCD(1B), a further deduction of upto 36,000
` 50,000 is allowable. Therefore, deduction under section
80CCD(1B) is ` 36,000 (` 1,80,000 - ` 1,44,000).
` 1,44,000 is allowable as deduction under section 80CCD(1). This would
be taken into consideration and be subject to the overall limit of
` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE. ` 36,000 allowable as deduction under
section 80CCD(1B) is outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under
section 80CCE.
In the alternative, ` 50,000 can be claimed as deduction under section
80CCD(1B). The balance ` 1,30,000 (` 1,80,000- ` 50,000) can be claimed
as deduction under section 80CCD(1).
(c) Employer’s contribution to pension scheme would be allowable as
deduction under section 80CCD(2), subject to a maximum of 10% of
salary. Therefore, deduction under section 80CCD(2), would also be
restricted to ` 1,44,000, even though the entire employer’s contribution
of ` 1,80,000 is included in salary under section 17(1)(viii). However, this
deduction of employer’s contribution of ` 1,44,000 to pension scheme
would be outside the overall limit of ` 1,50,000 under section 80CCE i.e.,
this deduction would be over and above the other deductions which
are subject to the limit of ` 1,50,000.
(ii) Where Mr. A pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC
Mr. A would not be eligible for deduction under section 80CCD(1)/(1B) in respect
of his contribution to pension scheme under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC. However, he would be allowed deduction of upto ` 2,01,600,
being 14% of salary [` 14,40,000, computed in (i) above] under section 80CCD(2)
in respect of employer’s contribution to pension scheme. Accordingly, entire
employer's contribution of ` 1,80,000 would be allowed as deduction under
section 80CCD(2).
ILLUSTRATION 6
The gross total income of Mr. X for the A.Y.2025-26 is ` 8,00,000. He has made the
following investments/payments during the F.Y.2024-25 –
Particulars `
(1) Contribution to PPF 1,10,000
(2) Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for 45,000
education of his son studying in Class XI
(3) Repayment of housing loan taken from Standard Chartered Bank 25,000
(4) Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC 1,05,000
Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. X
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars `
Deduction under section 80C
- Contribution to PPF 1,10,000
- Payment of tuition fees to Apeejay School, New Delhi, for
education of his son studying in Class XI 45,000
- Repayment of housing loan 25,000
1,80,000
Restricted to ` 1,50,000, being the maximum permissible deduction 1,50,000
u/s 80C
Deduction under section 80CCC
- Contribution to approved pension fund of LIC 1,05,000
2,55,000
As per section 80CCE, the aggregate deduction under section 80C,
80CCC and 80CCD(1) has to be restricted to ` 1,50,000
Deduction allowable under Chapter VIA for the A.Y. 2025-26 1,50,000
2.5 Deduction in respect of contribution to Agnipath Scheme
[Section 80CCH]
(i) Meaning of Agnipath scheme: Agnipath scheme is a Central Government
scheme launched in 2022 for enrolment of Indian youth in the Indian Armed
Forces.
(ii) Meaning of Agniveer Corpus Fund: The Agniveer Corpus Fund means a
fund in which consolidated contributions of all the Agniveers and matching
contributions of the Central Government along with interest on both these
contributions are held.
(iii) Features of the Agnipath Scheme: Each Agniveer is to contribute 30% of his
monthly customized Agniveer Package to the individual’s Agniveer Corpus
Fund. Further, the Government will also contribute a matching amount to the
‘Agniveer Corpus Fund’. The Government will also pay to the subscriber
interest as approved from time to time on the contributions standing in his
account.
(iv) Deduction: Section 80CCH provides deduction in respect of contribution
made in the Agniveer Corpus Fund by the individual enrolled in the Agnipath
Scheme and the Central Government.
(v) Quantum of deduction:
(a) Section 80CCH(1) provides a deduction for the amount paid or
deposited by an assessee, being an individual enrolled in the Agnipath
Scheme and subscribing to the Agniveer Corpus Fund on or after
1.11.2022, in his account in the Agniveer Corpus Fund.
Deduction u/s 80CCH(1) would be available to an
individual only if he has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided u/s 115BAC(1A).
(b) Under section 80CCH(2), the whole amount of contribution made by
the Central Government to the said account of an assessee in the
Agniveer Corpus Fund, is allowed as a deduction in computation of the
total income of the assessee.
(e) The entire Central Government’s contribution to the Agniveer Corpus
Fund would be included in the salary of the assessee. However,
deduction under section 80CCH(2) would be available for the same.
Deduction u/s 80CCH(2) would be available to an individual
irrespective of the regime under which he pays tax.
Exemption on payment from Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under
the Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee [Section 10(12C)]
Any payment from the Agnipath Corpus Fund to a person enrolled under the
Agnipath Scheme or to his nominee would be exempt from tax.
2.6 Deduction in respect of medical insurance premium
[Section 80D]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
1. In case of an Individual
(i) Deduction in respect of insurance premium paid for family: A deduction
to the extent of ` 25,000 is allowed in respect of the following payments –
(1) premium paid to effect or to keep in force an insurance on the health
of self, spouse and dependent children or
(2) any contribution made to the Central Government Health Scheme or
(3) such other health scheme as may be notified by the Central
Government. Contributory Health Service Scheme of the Department of
Space has been notified by the Central Government.
(ii) Deduction in respect of insurance premium for parents: A further
deduction up to ` 25,000 is allowable to effect or to keep in force an insurance
on the health of parents of the assessee.
Quantum of deduction in case of senior citizen: An increased
deduction of ` 50,000 (instead of ` 25,000) shall be allowed in
case any of the persons mentioned above is a senior citizen i.e.,
an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any time
during the relevant previous year.
(iii) Deduction in respect of payment towards preventive health check-up:
Section 80D provides that deduction to the extent of ` 5,000 shall be allowed
in respect payment made on account of preventive health check-up of self,
spouse, dependent children or parents during the previous year. However,
the said deduction of ` 5,000 is within the overall limit of ` 25,000 or ` 50,000,
specified in (i) and (ii) above.
(iv) Mode of payment: For claiming deduction under section 80D, the payment
can be made:
(1) by any mode, including cash, in respect of any sum paid on account of
preventive health check-up;
(2) by any mode other than cash, in all other cases.
(v) Deduction for medical expenditure incurred on senior citizens: As a
welfare measure towards senior citizens i.e., person of the age of 60 years
or more and resident in India, who are unable to get health insurance
coverage, deduction of upto ` 50,000 would be allowed in respect of any
payment made on account of medical expenditure in respect of a such
person(s), if no payment has been made to keep in force an insurance on the
health of such person(s).
2. In case of a HUF
Deduction under section 80D is allowable in respect of premium paid to
insure the health of any member of the family. The maximum deduction
available to a HUF would be ` 25,000 and in case any member is a senior
citizen, ` 50,000.
Further, the amount paid on account of medical expenditure incurred on the
health of any member(s) of a family who is a resident senior citizen would qualify
for deduction subject to a maximum of ` 50,000 provided no amount has been
paid to effect or keep in force any insurance on the health of such person(s).
3. Other conditions
The other conditions to be fulfilled are that such premium should be paid by
any mode, other than cash, in the previous year out of his income chargeable
to tax. Further, the medical insurance should be in accordance with a scheme
made in this behalf by -
(a) the General Insurance Corporation of India and approved by the Central
Government in this behalf; or
(b) any other insurer and approved by the Insurance Regulatory and
Development Authority.
The following table summarizes the provisions of section 80D –
S. Nature of payment/ Expenditure on behalf of Deduction
No. expenditure
I (i) Any premium paid,
otherwise than by In case of Self, spouse and ` 25,000
way of cash, to keep individual dependent
in force an insurance children
on the health
In case of Family member
(ii) Contribution to HUF
Central Government
Health Scheme
(CGHS) In case any of the above persons
is of the age of 60 years or more
(iii) Preventive health ` 50,000
+ resident in India
check up
expenditure
II (i) Any premium paid, Parents ` 25,000
otherwise than by way
of cash, to keep in In case either or both the parents
force an insurance on is of the age of 60 years or more +
the health Resident in India
` 50,000
(ii) Preventive health
check up
Maximum ` 5,000 allowed as deduction for aggregate of
preventive health check-up expenditure, by any mode including
cash, mentioned in I and II (Subject to overall limit of ` 25,000 or
` 50,000, as the case may be)
III Amount paid on account For self/spouse/parents + who is
of medical expenditure of the age of 60 years or more + ` 50,000
Resident in India + no payment
has been made to keep in force an
insurance on the health of such
person
Note: In case the individual o r any of his family members is a senior citizen, the
aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of premium, contribution to CGHS
and medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (I) & (III) above, cannot exceed
` 50,000.
In case one of the parents is a senior citizen who is covered under mediclaim policy
and another is also a senior citizen but not covered under mediclaim policy, the
aggregate of deduction, in respect of payment of medical insurance premium and
medical expenditure incurred, as specified in (II) & (III) above, cannot exceed
` 50,000.
4. Deduction where premium for health insurance is paid in lump sum
[Section 80D(4A)]
(i) Appropriate fraction of lump sum premium allowable as deduction:
In a case where mediclaim premium is paid in lumpsum for more than
one year by:
(a) an individual, to effect or keep in force an insurance on his health
or health of his spouse, dependent children or parents; or
(b) a HUF, to effect or keep in force an insurance on the health of any
member of the family,
then, the deduction allowable under this section for each of the relevant
previous year would be equal to the appropriate fraction of such lump
sum payment.
(ii) Meaning of certain terms
Term Meaning
Appropriate 1 ÷ Total number of relevant previous years
fraction
Relevant The previous year in which such lump sum amount
previous year is paid; and the subsequent previous year(s)
during which the insurance would be in force.
ILLUSTRATION 7
Mr. A, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 20,000 during the
P.Y. 2024-25 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse. He also paid
medical insurance premium of ` 47,000 during the year to insure the health of his
father, aged 63 years, who is not dependent on him. He contributed ` 3,600 to Central
Government Health Scheme during the year. He has incurred ` 3,000 in cash on
preventive health check-up of himself and his spouse and ` 4,000 by cheque on
preventive health check-up of his father. Compute the deduction allowable under
section 80D for the A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars Actual Maximum
Payment deduction
` allowable `
A. Premium paid and medical expenditure
incurred for self and spouse
(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self and 20,000 20,000
spouse
(ii) Contribution to CGHS 3,600 3,600
(iii) Exp. on preventive health check-up of self & spouse 3,000 1,400
26,600 25,000
B. Premium paid or medical expenditure incurred
for father, who is a senior citizen
(i) Mediclaim premium paid for father, who is over 47,000 47,000
60 years of age
(ii) Expenditure on preventive health check-up of 4,000 3,000
father
51,000 50,000
Total deduction under section 80D (` 25,000 + 75,000
` 50,000)
Notes:
(1) The total deduction under A. (i), (ii) and (iii) above should not exceed ` 25,000.
Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for self and spouse
would be restricted to ` 1,400, being (` 25,000 – ` 20,000 – ` 3,600).
(2) The total deduction under B. (i) and (ii) above should not exceed ` 50,000.
Therefore, the expenditure on preventive health check-up for father would be
restricted to ` 3,000, being (` 50,000 – ` 47,000).
(3) In this case, the total d eduction allowed on account of expenditure on
preventive health check-up of self, spouse and father is ` 4,400 (i.e., ` 1,400
+ ` 3,000), which is within the maximum permissible limit of ` 5,000.
ILLUSTRATION 8
Mr. Y, aged 40 years, paid medical insurance premium of ` 22,000 during the
P.Y. 2024-25 to insure his health as well as the health of his spouse and dependent
children. He also paid medical insurance premium of ` 33,000 during the year to insure
the health of his mother, aged 67 years, who is not dependent on him. He incurred
medical expenditure of ` 20,000 on his father, aged 71 years, who is not covered under
mediclaim policy. His father is also not dependent upon him. He contributed ` 6,000 to
Central Government Health Scheme during the year. Compute the deduction allowable
under section 80D for the A.Y. 2025-26 if Mr. Y has exercised the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Deduction allowable under section 80D for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars ` `
(i) Medical insurance premium paid for self, spouse and
dependent children 22,000
(ii) Contribution to CGHS 6,000
28,000
restricted to 25,000
(iii) Mediclaim premium paid for mother, who is over 60
years of age 33,000
(iv) Medical expenditure incurred for father, who is over
60 years of age and not covered by any insurance 20,000
53,000
restricted to 50,000
75,000
2.7 Deduction in respect of maintenance including medical
treatment of a dependant disabled [Section 80DD]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: Section 80DD provides deduction to an assessee, who is a
resident in India, being an individual or Hindu undivided family.
(ii) Payments qualifying for deduction:
(a) Any amount –
- incurred for the medical treatment (including nursing), training
and rehabilitation of a dependant, being a person with disability,
or
- paid or deposited under a scheme framed in this behalf by the
Life Insurance Corporation or any other insurer or the
Administrator or the Specified Company2 for the maintenance of
a dependant, being a person with disability
qualifies for deduction.
(b) The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to assessees
incurring expenditure on maintenance including medical treatment of
persons suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.
(iii) Quantum of deduction: The quantum of deduction is ` 75,000 and in case
of severe disability (i.e., person with 80% or more disability) the deduction
shall be ` 1,25,000.
(iv) Conditions:
(a) The scheme should provide for payment of annuity or a lump sum
amount for the benefit of a dependant, being a person with disability,
I in the event of the death of the individual or member of the HUF,
in whose name subscription was made; or
2 as referred to in section 2(h) of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal)
Act, 2002,
II on attaining t he age of 60 years or more by such individual or the
member of the HUF, and the payment or deposit to such scheme
has been discontinued
and the assessee must nominate either the dependant, being a person
with disability or any other person or a trust to receive the payment on
his behalf, for the benefit of the dependant, being a person with
disability.
(b) For claiming the deduction, the assessee have to furnish a copy of the
certificate issued by the medical authority under the Persons with
Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 along with the return of income under
section 139.
(c) Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh
certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after
the expiry of the period mentioned in the original certificate in order to
continue to claim the deduction.
(v) Deemed income:
If the dependent, being a person with disability, predeceases the individual
or the member of HUF, in whose name subscription was made, then, the
amount paid or deposited under the said scheme would be the deemed
income and chargeable to tax in the hands of the assessee (individual or
member of HUF) in the previous year in which such amount is received by
him.
However, such deeming provisions would not apply, to the amount received
by the dependent, being a person with disability, before his death, by way of
annuity or lump sum under the scheme mentioned in II of (a) above i.e., when
the individual or member of HUF attains the age of 60 years or more, and the
payment or deposit to such scheme has been discontinued.
(vi) Meaning of “Dependent”:
Assessee Dependant
(1) Individual the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the
individual who is wholly or mainly dependant on such
individual and not claimed deduction under section 80U in
the computation of his income
(2) HUF a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on
such HUF and not claimed deduction under section 80U
in the computation of his income
ILLUSTRATION 9
Mr. X is a resident individual. He deposits a sum of ` 50,000 with Life Insurance
Corporation every year for the maintenance of his disabled grandfather who is wholly
dependent upon him. The disability is one which comes under the Persons with
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act,
1995. A copy of the certificate from the medical authority is submitted. Compute the
amount of deduction available under section 80DD for the A.Y. 2025-26, if Mr. X has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Since the amount deposited by Mr. X was for his grandfather, he will not be allowed
any deduction under section 80DD. The deduction is available if the individual
assessee incurs any expense for a “dependant” disabled person. Grandfather does
not come within the meaning of “dependant” as defined under section 80DD.
ILLUSTRATION 10
What will be the deduction if Mr. X had made this deposit for his dependant father?
SOLUTION
Since the expense was incurred for a dependant disabled person, Mr. X will be
entitled to claim a deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD, irrespective of the
amount deposited. In case his father has severe disability, the deduction would be
` 1,25,000.
2.8 Deduction in re spect of medical treatment etc.
[Section 80DDB]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: This section provides deduction to an assessee, who is
resident in India, being an individual and Hindu undivided family. The
deduction is available to an individual for medical expenditure incurred on
himself or a dependant. It is also available to a Hindu undivided family (HUF)
for such expenditure incurred on any of its members.
(ii) Meaning of “Dependent”:
Assessee Dependent
(1) Individual the spouse, children, parents, brother or sister of the
individual or any of them, wholly or mainly dependant on
such individual for his support and maintenance.
(2) HUF a member of the HUF, wholly or mainly dependant on
such HUF for his support and maintenance.
(iii) Payment qualifying for deduction: Any amount actually paid for the
medical treatment of such disease or ailment as may be specified by the
Board for himself or a dependant, in case the assessee is an individual, or for
any member of a HUF, in case the assessee is a HUF, will qualify for deduction.
(iv) Quantum of deduction: The amount of deduction under this section shall be
equal to the amount actually paid or ` 40,000, whichever is less, in respect
of that previous year in which such amount was actually paid.
In case the amount is paid in respect of a senior citizen, i.e., a resident
individual of the age of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant
previous year, then the deduction would be the amount actually paid or
` 1,00,000, whichever is less.
The deduction under this section shall be reduced by the amount received, if
any, under an insurance from an insurer, or reimbursed by an employer, for
the medical treatment of the assessee or the dependant.
(v) Maximum deduction: The maximum limit of deduction under section 80DDB
for these two categories of dependant are summarized hereunder:
Dependent Maximum limit (`)
(1) A senior citizen, being a resident individual 1,00,000
(2) Other than a senior citizen 40,000
(vi) Condition: No such deduction shall be allowed unless the assessee obtains
the prescription for such medical treatment from a neurologist, an oncologist,
a urologist, a hematologist, an immunologist or such other specialist, as may
be prescribed.
2.9 Deduction in respect of interest on loan taken for higher
education [Section 80E]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: Section 80E provides deduction to an individual-assessee
in respect of any interest on loan paid by him in the previous year out of his
income chargeable to tax.
(ii) Conditions: The loan must have been taken for the purpose of pursuing his
higher education or for the purpose of higher education of his or her relative.
The loan must have been taken from any financial institution or approved
charitable institution.
(iii) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
(a) Relative Spouse and children of the individual or the student
for whom the individual is the legal guardian
(b) Higher It means any course of study (including vocational
education studies) pursued after passing the Senior Secondary
Examination or its equivalent from any school, board
or university recognised by the Central Government or
State Government or local authority or by any other
authority authorized by the Central Government or
State Government or local authority to do so.
Therefore, interest on loan taken for pursuing any
course after Class XII or its equivalent, will qualify for
deduction under section 80E.
(c) Period of The deduction is allowed in computing the total
deduction income in respect of the initial assessment year (i.e. the
assessment year relevant to the previous year, in which
the assessee starts paying the interest on the loan) and
seven assessment years immediately succeeding the
initial assessment year or until the interest is paid in
full by the assessee, whichever is earlier.
(d) Approved It means an institution established for charitable
charitable purposes and approved by the prescribed authority3
institution or an institution referred to in section 80G(2)(a).
(e) Financial It means –
institution (a) a banking company to which the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including a bank or
banking institution referred to in section 51 of the
Act); or
(b) any other financial institution which the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf
ILLUSTRATION 11
Mr. B has taken three education loans on April 1, 2024, the details of which are given
below:
Loan 1 Loan 2 Loan 3
For whose education loan was taken B Son of B Daughter of B
Purpose of loan MBA B. Sc. B.A.
Amount of loan (`) 5,00,000 2,00,000 4,00,000
Annual repayment of loan (`) 1,00,000 40,000 80,000
Annual repayment of interest (`) 20,000 10,000 18,000
Compute the amount deductible under section 80E for the A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. B has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
3 under section 10(23C)
SOLUTION
Deduction under section 80E is available to an individual assessee exercising the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A),
in respect of any interest paid by him in the previous year in respect of loan taken
for pursuing his higher education or higher education of his spouse or children.
Higher education means any course of study pursued after senior secondary
examination.
Therefore, interest repayment in respect of all the above loans would be eligible
for deduction.
Deduction under section 80E = ` 20,000 + ` 10,000 + ` 18,000 = ` 48,000.
2.10 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for
acquisition of residential house property by an individual
[Section 80EE]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of
residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on
such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.
(ii) Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
follows –
Value of house ≤ `50 lakhs
The assessee should
not own any residential Loan should be sanctioned
Conditions
house on the date of during the P.Y.2016-17
sanction of loan
Loan sanctioned ≤ `35 lakhs
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
available till the repayment of loan continues.
(iv) Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 50,000. The
deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80EE is over and above the
deduction of upto ` 2,00,000 available under section 24 for interest paid in
respect of loan borrowed for acquisition of a self-occupied property.
(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
under section 80EE will not be allowed as deduction under any other
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.
(vi) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
(a) Financial • A banking company to which the Banking
institution Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or
• Any bank or banking institution referred to in
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or
• A housing finance company.
(b) Housing A public company formed or registered in India with
finance the main object of carrying on the business of
company providing long-term finance for construction or
purchase of houses in India for residential purposes.
ILLUSTRATION 12
Mr. A purchased a residential house property for self-occupation at a cost of ` 45
lakh on 1.4.2017, in respect of which he took a housing loan of ` 35 lakh from Bank
of India@11% p.a. on the same date. The loan was sanctioned on 28th March, 2017.
Compute the eligible deduction in respect of interest on housing loan for
A.Y.2025-26 if Mr. A has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A), assuming that the entire loan was outstanding
as on 31.3.2025 and he does not own any other house property.
SOLUTION
Particulars `
Interest deduction for A.Y.2025-26
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the
head “Income from house property”
Deduction under section 24(b) ` 3,85,000
[` 35,00,000 × 11%]
Restricted to 2,00,000
(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction under section 80EE ` 1,85,000
(` 3,85,000 – ` 2,00,000)
Restricted to 50,000
2.11 Deduction for interest payable on loan borrowed for
acquisition of residential house property [Section 80EEA]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for acquisition of
residential house property from any financial institution. Interest payable on
such loan would qualify for deduction under this section.
(ii) Conditions: The conditions to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
follows –
Stamp Duty Value of
house ≤ `45 lakhs
The individual should Loan should be
not own any sanctioned by the
residential house on Conditions Financial Institution
the date of sanction of between 1st April, 2019
loan and 31st March 2022
The individual should not
be eligible to claim
deduction u/s 80EE
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
available for interest payable for each assessment year.
(iv) Quantum of deduction: The maximum deduction allowable is ` 1,50,000.
The deduction of upto ` 1,50,000 under section 80EEA is over and above the
deduction available unde r section 24(b) in respect of interest payable on loan
borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property.
(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
under section 80EEA will not be allowed as deduction under any other
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.
(vi) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
(a) Financial • A banking company to which the Banking
institution Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or
• Any bank or banking institution referred to in
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or
• A housing finance company.
(b) Housing A public company formed or registered in India with the
finance main object of carrying on the business of providing
company long-term finance for construction or purchase of
houses in India for residential purposes.
In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan
borrowed for acquisition of a residential house property
In case of self-occupied In case of let out or deemed
house property to be let out property
No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest payable
No interest deduction u/s 24(b)
is allowable as deduction. However, loss
from house property cannot be set off
against income under any other head.
No deduction u/s 80EEA
No deduction u/s 80EEA
In case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default
tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)
Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan borrowed for
acquisition of a residential house property
In case of self-occupied In case of let out or deemed to
house property be let out property
No limit u/s 24(b). Entire interest
restricted to` 2,00,000 u/s 24(b)
payable is allowable as deduction.
However, section 71(3A) restricts set
off of loss from house property
against income under any other
Deduction for interest upto
head to ` 2,00,000.
`1,50,000 can be claimed u/s
80EEA over and above deduction
u/s 24(b)
If there is a loss from house
property and it is more than
`2,00,000, interest of ` 2,00,000
can be claimed as deduction u/s
24(b) and balance interest upto
`1,50,000 can be claimed u/s
80EEA.
2.12 Deduction in respect of interest payable on loan taken
for purchase of electric vehicle [Section 80EEB]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible Assessee: An individual who has taken a loan for purchase of an
electric vehicle from any financial institution. Interest payable on such loan
would qualify for deduction under this section.
(ii) Conditions: The conditio ns to be satisfied for availing this deduction are as
follows –
Loan should be taken for
purchase of an electric
vehicle
Loan should be
The assessee should be
Conditions sanctioned between
an individual.
1.4.2019 and 31.3.2023
Loan should be
sanctioned by a FI (bank
or specified NBFCs)
(iii) Period of benefit: The benefit of deduction under this section would be
available for interest payable on such loan for each assessment year.
(iv) Quantum of deduction: Interest payable, subject to a maximum of
` 1,50,000.
(v) No deduction under any other provision: The interest allowed as deduction
under section 80EEB will not be allowed as deduction under any other
provision of the Act for the same or any other assessment year.
(vi) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
(a) Financial • A banking company to which the Banking
institution Regulation Act, 1949 applies; or
• Any bank or banking institution referred to in
section 51 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; or
• Any deposit taking NBFC; or
• A systemically important non-deposit taking NBFC
i.e., a NBFC which is not accepting or holding
public deposits and having total assets of not less
than ` 500 crore as per the last audited balance
sheet and is registered with the RBI.
(b) Electric A vehicle which is powered exclusively by an electric
Vehicle motor whose traction energy is supplied exclusively by
traction battery installed in the vehicle. The vehicle
should have electric regenerative braking system,
which during braking provides for the conversion of
vehicle kinetic energy into electrical energy.
ILLUSTRATION 13
The following are the particulars relating to Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D, salaried
individuals, for A.Y. 2025-26 –
Particulars Mr. A Mr. B Mr. C Mr. D
Amount of loan ` 43 lakhs ` 45 lakhs ` 20 lakhs ` 15 lakhs
taken
Loan taken from HFC Deposit taking Deposit Public
NBFC taking NBFC sector bank
Date of sanction 1.4.2021 1.4.2020 1.4.2020 30.3.2019
of loan
Date of 1.5.2021 1.5.2020 1.5.2020 1.5.2019
disbursement of
loan
Purpose of loan Acquisition of Acquisition of Purchase of Purchase of
residential residential electric electric
house property house property vehicle for vehicle for
for self- for self- personal use personal
occupation occupation use
Stamp duty value ` 45 lakhs ` 48 lakhs - -
of house property
Cost of electric - - ` 22 lakhs ` 18 lakhs
vehicle
Rate of interest 9% p.a. 9% p.a. 10% p.a. 10% p.a.
Compute the amount of deduction, if any, allowable under the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y.2025-26 in the hands of Mr. A, Mr. B, Mr. C and Mr. D if
they have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). Assume that there has been no principal repayment in respect
of any of the above loans upto 31.3.2025.
SOLUTION
Particulars `
Mr. A
Interest deduction for A.Y.2025-26
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the
head “Income from house property”
Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 3,87,000 [` 43,00,000 × 9%]
Restricted to 2,00,000
(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEA ` 1,87,000 (` 3,87,000 – ` 2,00,000)
Restricted to 1,50,000
Mr. B
Interest deduction for A.Y.2025-26
(i) Deduction allowable while computing income under the
head “Income from house property”
Deduction u/s 24(b) ` 4,05,000 [` 45,00,000 × 9%]
Restricted to 2,00,000
(ii) Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEA is not permissible since: Nil
(i) loan is taken from NBFC
(ii) stamp duty value exceeds ` 45 lakh.
Deduction under section 80EEA would not be permissible
due to either violation listed above.
Mr. C
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEB for interest payable on loan taken for purchase of 1,50,000
electric vehicle [` 20 lakhs x 10% = ` 2,00,000, restricted to ` 1,50,000,
being the maximum permissible deduction]
Mr. D
Deduction under Chapter VI-A from Gross Total Income
Deduction u/s 80EEB is not permissible since loan was sanctioned Nil
before 1.4.2019.
2.13 Deduction in respect of donations to certain funds,
charitable institutions etc. [Section 80G]
(i) Eligible assessee: An assessee who pays any sum as donation to eligible
funds or institutions, is entitled to a deduction, subject to certain limitations,
from the gross total income.
In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI
or an artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). It would not be available if they pay concessional rates
of tax under the default tax regime u/s 115BAC.
In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be
available if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/115BAB and
section 115BAD/115BAE, respectively. In other words, deduction would be
available only if they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.
(ii) Quantum of deduction:
There are four categories of deductions. The following table gives the details
of the institutions and funds to which donations can be made for the purpose
of claiming deduction under section 80G, –
I Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, without any qualifying
limit
(1) The National Defence Fund set up by the Central Government
(2) Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund.
(3) Prime Minister’s Armenia Earthquake Relief Fund
(4) The Africa (Public Contributions-India) Fund
(5) The National Children’s Fund
(6) The National Foundation for Communal Harmony
(7) Approved University or educational institution of national eminence
(8) Chief Minister’s Earthquake Relief Fund, Maharashtra
(9) Any fund set up by the State Government of Gujarat exclusively for
providing relief to the victims of the Gujarat earthquake
(10) Any Zila Saksharta Samiti constituted in any district for improvement
of primary education in villages and towns and for literacy and post-
literacy activities
(11) National Blood Transfusion Council or any State Blood Transfusion
Council whose sole objective is the control, supervision, regulation
or encouragement in India of the services related to operation and
requirements of blood banks
(12) Any State Government Fund set up to provide medical relief to the
poor
(13) The Army Central Welfare Fund or Indian Naval Benevolent Fund or Air
Force Central Welfare Fund established by the armed forces of the
Union for the welfare of past and present members of such forces or
their dependents.
(14) The Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister’s Cyclone Relief Fund, 1996
(15) The National Illness Assistance Fund
(16) The Chief Minister’s Relief Fund or Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund
in respect of any State or Union Territory
(17) The National Sports Development Fund set up by the Central
Government
(18) The National Cultural Fund set up by the Central Government
(19) The Fund for Technology Development and Application set up by
the Central Government
(20) National Trust for welfare of persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities
(21) The Swachh Bharat Kosh, set up by the Central Government, other than
the sum spent by the assessee in pursuance of CSR u/s 135(5) of the
Companies Act, 2013
(22) The Clean Ganga Fund, set up by the Central Government, where
such assessee is a resident, other than the sum spent in pursuance
of CSR u/s 135(5) of the Companies Act, 2013
(23) The National Fund for Control of Drug Abuse
(24) Prime Minister's Citizen Assistance and Relief in Emergency Situations
Fund (PM Cares Fund)
II Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, without any qualifying
limit
(1) Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund
III Donation qualifying for 100% deduction, subject to qualifying
limit
(1) The Government or to any approved local authority, institution or
association for promotion of family planning
(2) Sum paid by a company as donation to the Indian Olympic
Association or any other association/institution established in India,
as may be notified by the Government for the development of
infrastructure for sports or games, or the sponsorship of sports and
games in India
IV Donation qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit
(1) Any Institution or Fund established in India for charitable purposes
fulfilling prescribed conditions
(2) The Government or any local authority for utilisation for any charitable
purpose other than the purpose of promoting family planning
(3) An authority constituted in India by or under any other law enacted
either for dealing with and satisfying the need for housing
accommodation or for the purpose of planning, development or
improvement of cities, towns and villages, or both
(4) Any Corporation established by the Central Government or any State
Government for promoting the interests of the members of a
minority community
(5) for renovation or repair of Notified temple, mosque, gurdwara,
church or other place of historic, archaeological or artistic
importance or which is a place of public worship of renown
throughout any State or States
(iii) Qualifying limit: The eligible donations referred to in III and IV should be
aggregated and the sum total should be limited to 10% of the adjusted gross
total income. This would be the maximum permissible deduction.
The donations qualifying for 100% deduction would be first adjusted from
the maximum permissible deduction and thereafter 50% deduction of the
balance would be allowed.
Steps for computation of qualifying limit
Step 1: Compute adjusted total income i.e., the GTI as reduced by the
following:
(i) Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except under section 80G
(ii) Short-term capital gain taxable under section 111A
(iii) Long-term capital gains taxable under sections 112 & 112A
(iv) Any income on which income-tax is not payable
Step 2: Calculate 10% of adjusted total income
Step 3: Calculate the actual donation, which is subject to qualifying limit
(Total of Category III and IV donations, shown in the table above)
Step 4: Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum permissible deduction.
Step 5: The said deduction is adjusted first against donations qualifying
for 100% deduction (i.e., Category III donations). Thereafter, 50%
of balance qualifies for deduction under section 80G.
(iv) Other points:
(1) Where an assessee has claimed and has been allowed any deduction
under this section in respect of any amount of donation, the same
amount will not qualify for deduction under any other provision of the
Act for the same or any other assessment year.
(2) Donations in kind shall not qualify for deduction.
(3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum
exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.
(4) The deduction under section 80G can be claimed whether it has any
nexus with the business of the assessee or not.
(5) As per Circular No.2/2005 dated 12.1.2005, in cases where employees
make donations to the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund, the Chief
Minister’s Relief Fund or the Lieutenant Governor’s Relief Fund through
their respective employers, it is not possible for such funds to issue
separate certificate to every such employee in respect of donations
made to such funds as contributions made to these funds are in the
form of a consolidated cheque. An employee who makes donations
towards these funds is eligible to claim deduction under section 80G. It
is, hereby, clarified that the claim in respect of such donations as
indicated above will be admissible under section 80G on the basis of
the certificate issued by the Drawing and Disbursing Officer
(DDO)/Employer in this behalf.
(6) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any donation made
to an institution or fund [referred to in point (1) under (IV) “Donation
qualifying for 50% deduction, subject to qualifying limit”], in the return
of income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the
basis of information relating to said donation furnished by the
institution or fund to the prescribed income-tax authority or person
authorized by such authority, subject to verification as per the risk
management strategy formulated by the CBDT from time to time.
ILLUSTRATION 14
Mr. Shiva aged 58 years, has gross total income of ` 7,75,000 comprising of income
from salary and house property. He has made the following payments and
investments:
(i) Premium paid to insure the life of her major daughter (policy taken on 1.4.2018)
(Assured value ` 1,80,000) – ` 20,000.
(ii) Medical Insurance premium for self – ` 12,000; Spouse – ` 14,000.
(iii) Donation to a public charitable institution ` 50,000 by way of cheque.
(iv) LIC Pension Fund – ` 60,000.
(v) Donation to National Children’s Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque
(vi) Donation to Prime Minister’s Drought Relief Fund - ` 25,000 by way of cheque
(vii) Donation to approved institution for promotion of family planning - ` 40,000
by way of cheque
(viii) Deposit in PPF – ` 1,00,000
Compute the total income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26 if he exercises the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
Computation of Total Income of Mr. Shiva for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars ` `
Gross Total Income 7,75,000
Less: Deduction under section 80C
Deposit in PPF 1,00,000
Life insurance premium paid for insurance of 18,000
major daughter (Maximum 10% of the assured value
` 1,80,000, as the policy is taken after 31.3.2012)
1,18,000
Deduction under section 80CCC in respect of LIC
pension fund 60,000
1,78,000
As per section 80CCE, deduction under section 80C & 1,50,000
80CCC is restricted to
Deduction under section 80D
Medical Insurance premium in respect of self and spouse 26,000
Restricted to 25,000
Deduction under section 80G (See Working Note
below) 87,500
Total income 5,12,500
Working Note: Computation of deduction under section 80G
Particulars of donation Amount % of deduction Deduction
donated u/s 80G (`)
(`)
(i) National Children’s Fund 25,000 100% 25,000
(ii) Prime Minister’s 25,000 50% 12,500
Drought Relief Fund
(iii) Approved institution for 40,000 100%, subject to 40,000
promotion of family qualifying limit
planning
(iv) Public Charitable Trust 50,000 50% subject to
qualifying limit
(See Note below) 10,000
87,500
Note - Adjusted total income = Gross Total Income – Amount of deductions under
section 80C to 80U except section 80G i.e., ` 6,00,000, in this case.
` 60,000, being 10% of adjusted total income is the qualifying limit, in this case.
Firstly, donation of ` 40,000 to approved institution for family planning qualifying
for 100% deduction subject to qualifying limit, has to be adjusted against this
amount. Thereafter, donation to public charitable trust qualifying for 50%
deduction, subject to qualifying limit is adjusted. Hence, the contribution of
` 50,000 to public charitable trust is restricted to 20,000 (being, ` 60,000 - ` 40,000),
50% of which would be the deduction under section 80G. Therefore, the deduction
under section 80G in respect of donation to public charitable trust would be
` 10,000, which is 50% of ` 20,000.
2.14 Deduction in respect of rent paid [Section 80GG]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: Assessee, who is not in receipt of HRA qualifying for
exemption under section 10(13A) from employer and who pays rent for
accommodation occupied by him for residential purposes.
(ii) Conditions: The following conditions have to be satisfied for claiming
deduction under section 80GG -
(1) The assessee should not be receiving any house rent allowance exempt
under section 10(13A).
(2) The expenditure incurred by him on rent of any furnished or
unfurnished accommodation should exceed 10% of his total income
arrived at after all deductions under Chapter VI-A except section 80GG.
(3) The accommodation should be occupied by the assessee for the
purposes of his own residence.
(4) The assessee should fulfill such other conditions or limitations as may
be prescribed, having regard to the area or place in which such
accommodation is situated and other relevant considerations.
(5) The assessee or his spouse or his minor child or a HUF of which he is a
member should not own any accommodation at the place where he
ordinarily resides o r perform duties of his office or employment or
carries on his business or profession; or
(6) If the assessee owns any accommodation at any place other than that
referred to above, such accommodation should not be in the
occupation of the assessee and its annual value is not required to be
determined under section 23(2)(a) or section 23(4)(a).
(7) The assessee should file a declaration in the prescribed form,
confirming the details of rent paid and fulfillment of other conditions,
with the return of income.
(iii) Quantum of deduction: The deduction admissible will be the least of the
following:
(1) Actual rent paid minus 10% of the total income of the assessee before
allowing the deduction, or
(2) 25% of such total income (arrived at after making all deductions under
Chapter VI A but before making any deduction under this section), or
(3) Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m.
ILLUSTRATION 15
Mr. Ganesh, a businessman, whose total income (before allowing deduction under
section 80GG) for A.Y.2025-26 is ` 4,60,000, paid house rent at ` 12,000 p.m. in respect
of residential accommodation occupied by him at Mumbai. Compute the deduction
allowable to him under section 80GG for A.Y.2025-26 if he has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
The deduction under section 80GG will be computed as follows:
(i) Actual rent paid less 10% of total income
(10×4,60,000)
` 1,44,000 (-) = ` 98,000
25×4,60,000
(ii) 25% of total income = = ` 1,15,000
(iii) Amount calculated at ` 5,000 p.m. = ` 60,000
Deduction allowable u/s 80GG [least of (i), (ii) and (iii)] = ` 60,000
2.15 Deduction in respect of donations for scientific research
and rural development [Section 80GGA]
(i) Eligible assessee: Any assessee not having income chargeable under the
head “Profits and gains of business or profession”, who makes donations for
scientific research or rural development.
An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an
artificial juridical person will be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGA only if they
have exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction:
(1) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to a research
association which has, as its object, the undertaking of scientific
research or to a University, college or other institution to be used for
scientific research;
Such association, University, college or institution must be approved
under section 35(1)(ii).
(2) Any sum paid to a research association which has as its object the
undertaking of research in social science or statistical research,
University, College or other institution to be used for research in social
science or statistical research.
Such association, University, college or institution must be approved
under section 35(1)(iii).
(3) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to an association or
institution which has as its object the undertaking of any programme of
rural development, to be used for carrying out any programme of rural
development approved by the prescribed authority for purposes of
section 35CCA or to an institution or association which has as its object
the training of persons for implementing programmes of rural
development.
It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor)
is entitled on account of payment of any sum to
- a research association or university or college or other institution
for scientific r esearch or research in a social science or statistical
research or
- an association or institution for carrying out the programme of
rural development or
shall not be denied merely on the ground that subsequent to payment
of such sum by the assessee, the approval granted to any of the
aforesaid entities is withdrawn.
(4) Any sum paid to a public sector company or a local authority or to an
association or institution approved by the National Committee for
carrying out any eligible project or scheme.
It has been clarified that the deduction to which an assessee (i.e. donor)
is entitled on account of above shall not be denied merely on the
ground that subsequent to payment of such sum by the assessee, the
approval granted to any of the aforesaid entities is withdrawn or the
notification notifying the eligible project or scheme carried out
aforesaid entities has been withdrawn.
(5) Any sum paid to a rural development fund set up and notified under
section 35CCA.
(6) Any sum paid by the assessee in the previous year to National Urban
Poverty Eradication Fund (NUPEF).
(iii) Restrictions on deduction:
(1) No deduction under this section would be allowed in the case of an
assessee whose gross total income includes income which is chargeable
under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession.”
(2) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed for any
assessment year, deduction shall not be allowed in respect of such
payment under any provision of this Act for the same or any other
assessment year.
(3) No deduction shall be allowed in respect of donation of any sum
exceeding ` 2,000 unless such sum is paid by any mode other than cash.
(4) The claim of the assessee for deduction in respect of any sum referred
to under “(ii) Donations qualifying for deduction” in the return of
income for any assessment year filed by him, will be allowed on the
basis of information relating to such sum furnished by the payee to the
prescribed income-tax authority or person authorized by such
authority, subject to verification as per the risk management strategy
formulated by the CBDT from time to time.
2.16 Deduction in respect of contributions given by
companies to political parties [Section 80GGB]
(i) Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum
contributed in the previous year by an Indian company4 to any political party
or an electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of
any sum contributed by way of cash.
(ii) Meaning of “Contribute”: For the purposes of this section, the word
“contribute” has the same meaning assigned to it under section 293A of the
Companies Act, 19565, which provides that -
(a) a donation or subscription or payment given by a company to a person
for carrying on any activity which is likely to effect public support for a
political party shall also be deemed to be contribution for a political
purpose;
(b) the expenditure incurred, directly or indirectly, by a company on
advertisement in any publication (being a publication in the nature of a
souvenir, brochure, tract, pamphlet or the like) by or on behalf of a
political party or for its advantage shall also be deemed to be a
contribution to such political party or a contribution for a political
purpose to the person publishing it.
(iii) Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
ILLUSTRATION 16
During the P.Y. 2024-25, ABC Ltd., an Indian company,
(1) contributed a sum of ` 2 lakh to an electoral trust; and
4 Not opting for section 115BAA/ 115BAB
5Now section 182 of the Companies Act, 2013
(2) incurred expenditure of ` 25,000 on advertisement in a brochure of a political
party.
Is the company eligible for deduction in respect of such contribution/expenditure,
assuming that the contribution was made by cheque? If so, what is the quantum of
deduction? ABC Ltd. does not opt for section 115BAA/115BAB.
SOLUTION
An Indian company is eligible for deduction under section 80GGB in respect of any
sum contributed by it in the previous year to any political party or an electoral trust.
Further, the word “contribute” in section 80GGB has the meaning assigned to it in
section 293A of the Companies Act, 1956, and accordingly, it includes the amount
of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.
Therefore, ABC Ltd. is eligible for a deduction of ` 2,25,000 under section 80GGB in
respect of sum of ` 2 lakh contributed to an electoral trust and ` 25,000 incurred
by it on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.
It may be noted that there is a specific disallowance under section 37(2B) in respect
of expenditure incurred on advertisement in a brochure of a political party.
Therefore, the expenditure of ` 25,000 would be disallowed while computing
business income/gross total income. However, the said expenditure incurred by an
Indian company is allowable as a deduction from gross total income under section
80GGB.
2.17 Deduction in respect of contributions given by any
person to political parties [Section 80GGC]
(i) Deduction & Conditions: This section provides for deduction of any sum
contributed in the previous year by any person to a political party or an
electoral trust. However, no deduction shall be allowed in respect of any sum
contributed by way of cash.
(ii) Persons not eligible for deduction: This deduction will, however, not be
available to a local authority and an artificial juridical person, wholly or partly
funded by the Government.
(iii) Meaning of “Political party”: It means a political party registered under
section 29A of the Representation of the People Act, 1951.
An individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI
would be eligible for deduction u/s 80GGC only if they have exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). A co-operative society will not be eligible for deduction if it
opts for special provisions of section 115BAD/115BAE.
3. DEDUCTIONS IN RESPECT OF CERTAIN INCOMES
3.1 Deduction in respect of employment of new employees
[Section 80JJAA]
(i) Quantum and period of deduction: Where the gross total income of an
assessee to whom section 44AB applies, includes any profits and gains
derived from business, a deduction of an amount equal to 30% of additional
employee cost incurred in the course of such business in the previous year,
would be allowed for three assessment years including the assessment year
relevant to the previous year in which such employment is provided.
(ii) Conditions to be fulfilled: The deduction would be allowed only subject to
fulfilment of the following conditions:
The business is The report of the accountant,
not acquired by the giving the prescribed particulars,
The business should
assessee by way of has to be furnished before 30th
not be formed by
transfer from any September of the A.Y., being the
splitting up, or the
other person or as specified date referred to in
reconstruction, of an
a result of any Section 44AB i.e., the date one
existing business
business month prior to due date for
reorganisation filing ROI u/s 139(1)
(iii) Meaning of certain terms:
Term Meaning
(a) Additional Total emoluments paid or payable to additional
employee employees employed during the previous year.
cost
In the case of The additional employee cost shall be
an existing Nil, if -
business (a) there is no increase in the number
of employees from the total
number of employees employed
as on the last day of the preceding
year;
(b) emoluments are paid otherwise
than by an account payee cheque
or account payee bank draft or by
use of electronic clearing system
through a bank account or through
any other prescribed electronic
mode [credit card, debit card, net
banking, IMPS (Immediate
Payment Services), UPI (Unified
Payment Interface), RTGS (Real
Time Gross Settlement), NEFT
(National Electronic Fund Transfer),
BHIM (Bharat Interface for Money)
Aadhar Pay].
In the first The emoluments paid6 or payable to
year of a new employees employed during that
business previous year shall be deemed to be
the additional employee cost.
(b) Additional An employee who has been employed during the
employee previous year and whose employment has the effect of
increasing the total number of employees employed
by the employer as on the last day of the preceding
year.
Exclusions from the definition:
(a) an employee whose total emoluments are more
than ` 25,000 per month; or
(b) an employee for whom the entire contribution is
6 As per Form No.10DA read with Rule 19AB, the amount shall not include emoluments paid
otherwise than by way of account payee cheque/bank draft/ECS through a bank account and
prescribed electronic modes
paid by the Government under the Employees’
Pension Scheme notified in accordance with the
provisions of the Employees’ Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952; or
(c) an employee who does not participate in the
recognised provident fund.
(d) an employee employed for a period of less than
240 days during the previous year. In case of an
assessee engaged in the business of
manufacturing of apparel or footwear or leather
products, an employee employed for a period of
less than 150 days during the previous year; or
Note – If an employee is employed during the previous
year for less than 240 days or 150 days, as the case may
be, but is employed for a period of 240 days or 150
days, as the case may be, in the immediately
succeeding year, he shall be deemed to have been
employed in the succeeding year.
Accordingly, the employer would be entitled to
deduction of 30% of additional employee cost of such
employees for three years from the succeeding year.
(c) Emoluments any sum paid or payable to an employee in lieu of his
employment by whatever name called.
Exclusions from the definition:
(a) any contribution paid or payable by the
employer to any pension fund or provident fund
or any other fund for the benefit of the employee
under any law for the time being in force; and
(b) any lump-sum payment paid or payable to an
employee at the time of termination of his
service or superannuation or voluntary
retirement, such as gratuity, severance pay, leave
encashment, voluntary retrenchment benefits,
commutation of pension and the like.
Deduction u/s 80J JAA would be available to an assessee irrespective of
the regime under which he pays tax.
ILLUSTRATION 17
Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of computers on 1.4.2024. He
employed 350 new employees during the P.Y. 2024-25, the details of whom are as
follows –
No. of Date of Regular/ Total monthly
employees employment Casual emoluments per
employee (`)
(i) 75 1.4.2024 Regular 24,000
(ii) 125 1.5.2024 Regular 26,000
(iii) 50 1.8.2024 Casual 24,500
(iv) 100 1.9.2024 Regular 24,000
The regular employees participate in recognized provident fund while the casual
employees do not. Compute the deduction, if any, available to Mr. A for
A.Y. 2025-26, if the profits and gains derived from manufacture of computers that
year is ` 75 lakhs and his total turnover is ` 10.16 crores.
What would be your answer if Mr. A has commenced the business of manufacture of
footwear on 1.4.2024?
SOLUTION
Mr. A is eligible for deduction under section 80JJAA since he is subject to tax audit
under section 44AB for A.Y. 2025-26 and he has employed “additional employees”
during the P.Y. 2024-25.
I If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of computers
Additional employee cost = ` 24,000 × 12 × 75 [See Working Note below]
= ` 2,16,00,000
Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 2,16,00,000 = ` 64,80,000.
Working Note:
Number of additional employees
Particulars No. of
workmen
Total number of employees employed during the year 350
Less: Casual employees employed on 1.8.2024 who do 50
not participate in recognized provident fund
Regular employees employed on 1.5.2024, since 125
their total monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000
Regular employees employed on 1.9.2024 since
they have been employed for less than 240 days in 100 275
the P.Y.2024-25.
Number of “additional employees” 75
Notes –
(i) Since casual employees do not participate in recognized provident fund,
they do not qualify as additional employees. Further, 125 regular
employees employed on 1.5.2024 also do not qualify as additional
employees since their monthly emoluments exceed ` 25,000. Also, 100
regular employees employed on 1.9.2024 do not qualify as additional
employees for the P.Y.2024-25, since they are employed for less than 240
days in that year.
Therefore, only 75 employees employed on 1.4.2024 qualify as additional
employees, and the total emoluments paid or payable to them during the
P.Y.2024-25 is deemed to be the additional employee cost.
(ii) As regards 100 regular employees employed on 1.9.2024, they would be
treated as additional employees for previous year 2025-26, if they
continue to be employees in that year for a minimum period of 240 days.
Accordingly, 30% of additional employee cost in respect of such
employees would be allowable as deduction under section 80JJAA in the
hands of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2026-27.
II If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear
If Mr. A is engaged in the business of manufacture of footwear, then, he would
be entitled to deduction under section 80JJAA in respect of employee cost of
regular employees emplo yed on 1.9.2024, since they have been employed for
more than 150 days in the previous year 2024-25.
Additional employee cost = ` 2,16,00,000 + ` 24,000 × 7 × 100 = ` 3,84,00,000
Deduction under section 80JJAA = 30% of ` 3,84,00,000 = ` 1,15,20,000.
3.2 Deduction in respect of royalty income, etc., of authors
of certain books other than text books [Section 80QQB]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee & Quantum of deduction: Under section 80QQB,
deduction of up to a maximum ` 3,00,000 is allowed to an individual resident
in India in respect of income derived as author or joint author i.e., the
deduction shall be the income derived as author or as joint author or
` 3,00,000, whichever is less.
(ii) Eligible Income:
(a) This income may be received either by way of a lumpsum consideration
for the assignment or grant of any of his interests in the copyright of
any book.
(b) Such book should be a work of literary, artistic or scientific nature, or of
royalties or copyright fees (whether receivable in lump sum or
otherwise) in respect of such book.
(c) This deduction shall not, however, be available in respect of royalty
income from textbook for schools, guides, commentaries, brochures,
diaries, magazines, newspapers, journals, pamphlets, tracts and other
publications of similar nature.
Note - Where an assessee claims deduction under this section, no deduction
in respect of the same income may be claimed under any other provision of
the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(iii) Manner of computation of deduction: For the purpose of calculating the
deduction under this section, the amount of eligible income (royalty or
copyright fee received otherwise than by way of lumpsum) before allowing
expenses attributable to such income, shall not exceed 15% of the value of
the books sold during the previous year.
However, this condition is not applicable where the royalty or copyright fees
is receivable in lump sum in lieu of all rights of the author in the book.
(iv) Conditions:
(a) Furnishing of certificate in prescribed form: For claiming the
deduction, the assessee shall have to furnish a certificate in the
prescribed manner in the prescribed format, duly verified by the person
responsible for making such payment, setting forth such particulars as
may be prescribed.
(b) Period for repatriation of income earned outside India: Where the
assessee earns any income from any source outside India, he should
bring such income into India in convertible foreign exchange within a
period of six months from the end of the previous year in which such
income is earned or within such further period as the competent
authority may allow in this behalf for the purpose of claiming deduction
under this section.
The competent authority shall mean the Reserve Bank of India or such
other authority as is authorised under any law for the time being in
force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
ILLUSTRATION 18
Mr. Aakash earned royalty of ` 2,88,000 from a foreign country for a book authored
by him, being a work of literary nature. The rate of royalty is 18% of value of books.
The expenditure incurred by him for earning this royalty was ` 40,000. The amount
remitted to India till 30th September, 2025 is ` 2,30,000. The remaining amount was
not remitted till 31st March, 2026. Compute the amount includible in the gross total
income of Mr. Aakash and the amount of deduction which he will be eligible for under
section 80QQB if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
The net royalty of ` 2,48,000 (i.e., royalty of ` 2,88,000 less ` 40,000, being
expenditure to earn such income) is includible in gross total income. Deduction u/s
80QQB would be ` 1,90,000 as calculated hereunder –
P articulars `
Royalty ` 2,88,000 x 15/18 = ` 2,40,000
Restricted to
Amount brought into India in convertible foreign exchange within
the prescribed time 2,30,000
Less: Expenses already allowed as deduction while computing
royalty income 40,000
Deduction u/s 80QQB 1,90,000
3.3 Deduction in respect of royalty on patents
[Section 80RRB]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: A resident individual who is registered as the true and first
inventor in respect of an invention under the Patents Act, 1970, including the
co-owner of the patent and earning income by way of royalty of a patent
registered on or after 1.4.2003.
(ii) Quantum of deduction: Income by way of royalty of a patent registered on
or after 1.4.2003, subject to a maximum of ` 3 lakhs.
Note - No deduction in respect of such income will be allowed under any
other provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961
(iii) Eligible income: This exemption shall be restricted to the royalty income
including consideration for transfer of rights in the patent or for providing
information for working or use of a patent, use of a patent or the rendering
of any services in connection with these activities.
The exemption shall not be available on any consideration for sale of product
manufactured with the use of the patented process or patented article for
commercial use.
(iv) Conditions: In respect of any such income which is earned from sources
outside India, the deduction shall be restricted to such sum as is brought to
India in convertible foreign exchange within a period of 6 months from the end
of the previous year in which such income is earned or extended period as is
allowed by the competent authority (Reserve Bank of India). For claiming this
deduction the assessee shall be required to furnish a certificate in the
prescribed form signed by the prescribed authority.
4. DEDUCTION IN RESPECT OF OTHER INCOME
4.1 Deduction in respect of interest on deposits in savings
accounts [Section 80TTA]
[Available only if the individual/HUF exercises the option of shifting out
of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee and Quantum of deduction: Section 80TTA provides that
in case the gross total income of an assessee, being an individual or a Hindu
Undivided Family, includes any income by way of an interest on deposits in a
saving account (not being time deposits, which are deposits repayable on
expiry of fixed periods), deduction up to ` 10,000 in aggregate shall be
allowed while computing the total income of such assessee. Such deduction
shall be allowed in case the saving account is maintained with:
(1) a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies
(including any bank or banking institution referred to in section 51 of
that Act);
(2) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking
(including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land
development bank); or
(3) a post office.
Deduction under this section would, however, not be available to
a senior citizen eligible for deduction under section 80TTB.
(ii) Restrictions: If the aforesaid income is derived from any deposit in a savings
account held by, or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP/BOI, no deduction shall be
allowed in respect of such income in computing the total income of any
partner of the firm or any member of the AOP or any individual of the BOI.
In effect, the deduction under this section shall be allowed only in respect of
the income derived in form of the interest on the saving bank deposit (other
than time deposits) made by the individual or Hindu Undivided Family
directly.
4.2 Deduction in resp ect of interest on deposits in case of
senior citizens [Section 80TTB]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of
the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Eligible assessee: A senior citizen (a resident individual who is of the age of
60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year), whose gross
total income includes income by way of interest on deposits (both fixed
deposits and saving accounts) with –
(a) a banking company to which Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies
(b) a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking
(including a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-operative land
development bank)
(c) a Post Office.
(ii) Quantum of deduction: Actual amount of interest on deposits or
` 50,000, whichever is lower.
(iii) Non-availability of deduction to partner/member, where deposit held by
firm/AOP/BOI: Where interest income is derived from any deposit held by,
or on behalf of, a firm, an AOP or a BOI, the partner of the firm or member of
AOP/BOI would not be allowed deduction in respect of such income while
computing their total income.
ILLUSTRATION 19
Mr. A, a resident individual aged 61 years, has earned business income (computed)
of ` 1,35,000, lottery income of ` 1,20,000 (gross) during the P.Y. 2024-25. He also
has interest on Fixed Deposit of ` 30,000 with banks. He invested an amount of
` 1,50,000 in Public Provident Fund account. What is the total income of Mr. A for
the A.Y. 2025-26 if he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A)?
SOLUTION
Computation of total income of Mr. A for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars ` `
Profits and gains of business or profession 1,35,000
Income from other sources
- Interest on Fixed Deposit with banks 30,000
- lottery income 1,20,000
Gross Total Income 2,85,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA [See Note below]
Under section 80C
- Deposit in Public Provident Fund 1,50,000
Under section 80TTB
- Interest on fixed deposits with banks 30,000
1,80,000
Restricted to 1,65,000
Total Income 1,20,000
Note: In case of resident individuals of the age of 60 years or more, interest on bank
fixed deposits qualifies for deduction upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB.
Though the aggregate of deductions under Chapter VI-A is ` 1,80,000, however, the
maximum permissible deduction cannot exceed the gross total income exclusive of long
term capital gains taxable under section 112 and section 112A, short-term capital gains
covered under section 111A and winnings from lotteries of the assessee.
Therefore, the maximum permissible deduction under Chapter VI-A = ` 2,85,000 –
` 1,20,000 = ` 1,65,000.
ILLUSTRATION 20
Mr. Gurnam, aged 42 years, has salary income (computed) of ` 5,50,000 for the
previous year ended 31.03.2025. He has earned interest of ` 14,500 on the saving
bank account with State Bank of India during the year. Compute the total income of
Mr. Gurnam for the assessment year 2025-26 from the following particulars,
assuming he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A):
(i) Life insurance premium p aid to Birla Sunlife Insurance in cash amounting to
` 25,000 for insurance of life of his dependent parents. The insurance policy
was taken on 15.07.2021 and the sum assured on life of his dependent parents
is ` 2,00,000.
(ii) Life insurance premium of ` 19,500 paid for the insurance of life of his major
son who is not dependent on him. The sum assured on life of his son is
` 3,50,000 and the life insurance policy was taken on 30.3.2012.
(iii) Life insurance premium paid by cheque of ` 22,500 for insurance of his life. The
insurance policy was taken on 08.09.2020 and the sum assured is
` 2,00,000.
(iv) Premium of ` 26,000 paid by cheque for health insurance of self and his wife.
(v) ` 1,500 paid in cash for his health check-up and ` 4,500 paid in cheque for
preventive health check-up for his parents, who are senior citizens.
(vi) Paid interest of ` 6,500 on loan taken from bank for MBA course pursued by his
daughter.
(vii) A sum of ` 5,000 donated in cash to an institution approved for purpose of
section 80G for promoting family planning.
SOLUTION
Computation of total income of Mr. Gurnam for the
Assessment Year 2025-26
Particulars ` ` `
Income from salary 5,50,000
Interest on saving bank deposit 14,500
Gross Total Income 5,64,500
Less: Deduction under Chapter VIA
Under section 80C (See Note 1)
- major son 19,500
- self ` 22,500 restricted to 10% of ` 2,00,000 20,000 39,500
Under section 80D (See Note 2)
Premium paid for ` 26,000 health insurance of self
and wife by cheque, restricted to 25,000
Payment made for health check-up for parents 4,500 29,500
Under section 80E
For payment of interest on loan taken from bank 6,500
for MBA course of his daughter
Under section 80TTA (See Note 4)
Interest on savings bank account ` 14,500 10,000 85,500
restricted to
Total Income 4,79,000
Notes:
(1) As per section 80C, no deduction is allowed in respect of premium paid for
life insurance of parents, whether they are dependent or not. Therefore, no
deduction is allowable in respect of ` 25,000 paid as premium for life
insurance of dependent parents of Mr. Gurnam.
In respect of insurance policy issued on or after 01.04.2012, deduction shall
be allowed for life insurance premium paid only to the extent of 10% of sum
assured. In case the insurance policy is issued before 01.04.2012, deduction
of premium paid on life insurance policy shall be allowed up to 20% of sum
assured.
Therefore, in the present case, deduction of ` 19,500 is allowable in full in
respect of life insurance of Mr. Gurnam’s son since the insurance policy was
issued before 01.04.2012 and the premium amount is less than 20% of
` 3,50,000. However, in respect of premium paid for life insurance policy of
Mr. Gurnam himself, deduction is allowable only up to 10% of ` 2,00,000
since, the policy was issued on or after 01.04.2012 and the premium amount
exceeds 10% of sum assured.
(2) As per section 80D, in case the premium is paid in respect of health of a
person specified therein and for health check-up of such person, deduction
shall be allowed up to ` 25,000. Further, deduction up to ` 5,000 in aggregate
shall be allowed in respect of health check-up of self, spouse, children and
parents. In order to claim deduction under section 80D, the payment for
health-checkup can be made in any mode including cash. However, the
payment for health insurance premium has to be paid in any mode other than
cash.
Therefore, in the presen t case, in respect of premium of ` 26,000 paid for
health insurance of self and wife, deduction would be restricted to
` 25,000. Since the limit of ` 25,000 has been exhausted against medical
insurance premium, no deduction is allowable for preventive health check-up
for self and wife. However, deduction of ` 4,500 is allowable in respect of
health check-up of his parents, since it falls within the limit of ` 5,000.
(3) No deduction shall be allowed under section 80G in case the donation is
made in cash of a sum exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore, deduction under section
80G is not allowable in respect of cash donation of ` 5,000 made to an
institution approved for the purpose of section 80G for promotion of family
planning.
(4) As per section 80TTA, deduction shall be allowed from the gross total income
of an individual or Hindu Undivided Family in respect of income by way of
interest on deposit in the savings account included in the assessee’s gross
total income, subject to a maximum of ` 10,000. Therefore, deduction of
` 10,000 is allowable from the gross total income of Mr. Gurnam, though the
interest from savings bank account is ` 14,500.
5. OTHER DEDUCTIONS
Deduction in the case of a person with disability
[Section 80U]
[Available only if the individual exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
(i) Section 80U harmonizes the criteria for defining disability as existing under
the Income-tax Rules with the criteria prescribed under the Persons with
Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation)
Act, 1995.
(ii) Eligible assessee: This section is applicable to a resident individual, who, at
any time during the previous year, is certified by the medical authority to be
a person with disability.
The benefit of deduction under this section is also available to persons
suffering from autism, cerebral palsy and multiple disabilities.
(iii) Quantum of deduction: A deduction of ` 75,000 in respect of a person with
disability and ` 1,25,000 in respect of a person with severe disability (having
disability over 80%) is allowable under this section.
(iv) Conditions:
(a) The assessee claiming a deduction under this section shall furnish a
copy of the certificate issued by the medical authority in the form and
manner, as may be prescribed, along with the return of income under
section 139, in respect of the assessment year for which the deduction
is claimed.
(b) Where the condition of disability requires reassessment, a fresh
certificate from the medical authority shall have to be obtained after
the expiry of the period mentioned on the original certificate in order
to continue to claim the deduction.
6. DEDUCTION UNDER SECTION 10AA
A deduction of profits and gains which are derived by an assessee being an
entrepreneur from the export of articles or things or providing any service, shall be
allowed from the total income of the assessee.
In case of an individual, HUF, AoP (other than a co-operative society) or BoI or an
artificial juridical person, deduction would be available only if they have exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A). The deduction would be available only under the optional tax regime,
where they pay tax under the normal provisions of the Act.
In case of companies and co-operative societies, deduction would not be available
if they opt for the special provisions u/s 115BAA/ 115BAB and section 115BAD/
115BAE, respectively. The deduction would be available if they pay tax under the
normal provisions of the Act.
(1) Assessees who are eligible for exemption
Exemption is available to all categories of assessees who derive any profits or
gains from an undertaking, being a unit, engaged in the manufacturing or
production of articles or things or provision of any service. Such assessee
should be an entrepreneur referred to in section 2(j) of the SEZ Act, 2005 i.e.,
a person who has been granted a letter of approval by the Development
Commissioner under section 15(9) of the said Act.
(2) Essential conditions to claim exemption
The exemption shall apply to an undertaking which fulfils the following
conditions:
(i) It has begun to manufacture or produce articles or things or provide
any service in any SEZ during the previous year relevant to A.Y.2006-07
or any subsequent assessment year but not later than A.Y.2020-21.
However, in case where letter of approval, required to be issued in
accordance with the provisions of the SEZ Act, 2005, has been issued
on or before 31st March, 2020 and the manufacture or production of
articles or things or providing services has not begun on or before 31st
March, 2020 then, the date for manufacture or production of articles or
things or providing services has been extended to
31st March, 2021 or such other date after 31st March, 2021, as notified
by the Central Government.
For e.g. If the SEZ unit has received the necessary approval by 31.3.2020
and begins manufacture or production of articles or things or providing
services on or before 31st March, 2021, then it would be deemed to
have begun manufacture or production of articles or things or
providing services during the A.Y. 2020-21 and would be eligible for
exemption under section 10AA. [The Taxation and Other Laws
(Relaxation of Certain Provisions) Act, 2020]
(ii) The assessee should furnish in the prescribed form, before the date
specified in section 44AB i.e., one month prior to the due date for
furnishing return of income u/s 139(1), the report of a chartered
accountant certifying that the deduction has been correctly claimed.
(iii) No deduction under section 10AA would be allowed to an assessee
who does not furnish a return of income on or before the due date
specified u/s 139(1).
Example : An individual, subject to tax audit u/s 44AB, claiming
deduction u/s 10AA is required to furnish return of income on or before
31.10.2025 for A.Y. 2025-26 and the report of a chartered accountant
before 30.9.2025, certifying the deduction claimed u/s 10AA.
(iv) Deduction under section 10AA would be available to a Unit, if the
proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services is received in, or
brought into, India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange,
within a period of 6 months from the end of the previous year or, within
such further period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.
The export proceeds from sale of goods or provision of services shall
be deemed to have been received in India where such export turnover
is credited to a separate account maintained for that purpose by the
assessee with any bank outside India with the approval of the Reserve
Bank of India.
Meaning of Competent authority – Competent authority means RBI
or such authority as is authorized under any law for the time being in
force for regulating payments and dealings in foreign exchange.
(3) Period for which deduction is available
The unit of an entrepreneur, which begins to manufacture or produce any
article or thing or provide any service in a SEZ on or after 1.4.2005, shall be
allowed a deduction of:
(i) 100% of the profits and gains derived from the export, of such articles
or things or from services for a period of 5 consecutive assessment
years beginning with the assessment year relevant to the previous year
in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce such articles or
things or provide services, and
(ii) 50% of such profits and gains for further 5 assessment years.
(iii) So much of the amount not exceeding 50% of the profit as is debited
to the profit and loss account of the previous year in respect of which
the deduction is to be allowed and credited to a reserve account (to be
called the "Special Economic Zone Re-investment Reserve Account") to
be created and utilised in the manner laid down under section 10AA(2)
for next 5 consecutive years.
However, Explanation b elow section 10AA(1) clarified that amount of
deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed from the total income of the
assessee computed in accordance with the provisions of the Act before giving
effect to the provisions of this section and the deduction under section 10AA
shall not exceed such total income of the assessee.
Example :
An undertaking is set up in a SEZ and begins manufacturing on 15.10.2010.
The deduction under section 10AA shall be allowed as under:
(a) 100% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2011-12 to
A.Y.2015-16.
(b) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2016-17 to A.Y.
2020-21.
(c) 50% of profits of such undertaking from exports from A.Y.2021-22 to
A.Y.2025-26 provided certain conditions are satisfied.
(4) Conditions to be satisfied for claiming deduction for further 5 years
(after 10 years) [Section 10AA(2)]
Sub-section (2) provides that the deduction under (3)(iii) above shall be
allowed only if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely:-
(a) the amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment
Reserve Account is utilised-
(1) for the purposes of acquiring machinery or plant which is first put
to use before the expiry of a period of three years following the
previous year in which the reserve was created; and
(2) until the acquisition of the machinery or plant as aforesaid, for the
purposes of the business of the undertaking. However, it should
not be utilized for
(i) distribution by way of dividends or profits; or
(ii) for remittance outside India as profits; or
(iii) for the creation of any asset outside India;
(b) the particulars, as may be specified by the CBDT in this behalf, have
been furnished by the assessee in respect of machinery or plant. Such
particulars include details of the new plant/machinery, name and
address of the supplier of the new plant/machinery, date of acquisition
and date on which new plant/machinery was first put to use. Such
particulars have to be furnished along with the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the previous year in which such plant or
machinery was first put to use.
(5) Consequences of mis-utilisation/ non-utilisation of reserve [Section
10AA(3)]
Where any amount credited to the Special Economic Zone Re-investment
Reserve Account -
(a) has been utilised for any purpose other than those referred to in sub-
section (2), the amount so utilized shall be deemed to be the profits in
the year in which the amount was so utilised and charged to tax
accordingly; or
(b) has not been utilised before the expiry of the said period of 3 years, the
amount not so utilised, shall be deemed to be the profits in the year
immediately following the said period of three years and be charged to
tax accordingly.
(6) Computation of profits and gains from exports of such undertakings
The profits derived from export of articles or things or services (including
computer software) shall be the amount which bears to the profits of the
business of the undertaking, being the unit, the same proportion as the
export turnover in respect of such articles or things or services bears to the
total turnover of the business carried on by the undertaking i.e.
Profits of Unit in SEZ x
E x
T
p
o
o
t a
r t t
l t u
u
r
r
n
n
o
o
v
v
e
e
r
r o
o f
f U
U n
n it S
it S E
E
Z
Z
Clarification on issues relating to export of computer software
Section 10AA provides deduction to assessees who derive any profits and
gains from export of articles or things or services (including computer
software) from the year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or produce
such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, subject to
fulfillment of the prescribed conditions. The profits and gains derived from
the on site development of computer software (including services for
development of software) outside India shall be deemed to be the profits and
gains derived from the export of computer software outside India.
Meaning of Export turn over: It means the consideration in respect of export
by the undertaking being the unit of articles or things or services received in
India or brought into India by the assessee in convertible foreign exchange
within 6 months from the end of the previous year or within such further
period as the competent authority may allow in this behalf.
However, it does not include
- freight
- telecommunication charges
- insurance
attributable to the delivery of the articles or things outside India or expenses
incurred in foreign exchange in rendering of services (including computer
software) outside India.
Clarification on issues relating to deduction of freight,
telecommunication charges and other expenses from total
turnover
"Export turnover", inter alia, does not include freight, telecommunication
charges or insurance attributable to the delivery of the articles or things
outside India or expenses, if any, incurred in foreign exchange in rendering
of services (including computer software) outside India.
CBDT has, vide circular No. 4/2018, dated 14/08/2018, clarified that freight,
telecommunication charges and insurance expenses are to be excluded
both from "export turnover" and "total turnover', while working out
deduction admissible under section 10AA to the extent they are
attributable to the delivery of articles or things outside India.
Similarly, expenses incurred in foreign exchange for rendering services
outside India are to be excluded from both "export turnover" and "total
turnover" while computing deduction admissible under section 10AA.
(7) Restriction on other tax benefits
(i) The business loss under section 72(1) or loss under the head “Capital
Gains” under section 74(1), in so far as such loss relates to the business
of the undertaking, being the Unit shall be allowed to be carried forward
or set off.
(ii) During the period of deduction, depreciation is deemed to have been
allowed on the assets. Written Down Value shall accordingly be
reduced.
(iii) No deduction under section 80-IA and 80-IB7 shall be allowed in
relation to the profits and gains of the undertaking.
(iv) Where any goods or services held for the purposes of eligible business
are transferred to any other business carried on by the assessee, or
where any goods held for any other business are transferred to the
eligible business and, in either case, if the consideration for such
transfer as recorded in the accounts of the eligible business does not
correspond to the market value thereof, then the profits eligible for
deduction shall be computed by adopting market value of such goods
or services on the date of transfer. In case of exceptional difficulty in
this regard, the profits shall be computed by the Assessing Officer on a
reasonable basis as he may deem fit. Similarly, where due to the close
connection between the assessee and the other person or for any other
reason, it appears to the Assessing Officer that the profits of eligible
business is increased to more than the ordinary profits, the Assessing
Officer shall compute the amount of profits of such eligible business on
a reasonable basis for allowing the deduction.
(v) Where a deduction under this section is claimed and allowed in relation
to any specified business eligible for investment-linked deduction
under section 35AD, no deduction shall be allowed under section 35AD
in relation to such specified business for the same or any other
assessment year.
(8) Deduction allowable in case of amalgamation and demerger
In the event of any undertaking, being the Unit which is entitled to deduction
under this section, being transferred, before the expiry of the period specified
in this section, to another undertaking, being the Unit in a scheme of
amalgamation or demerger, -
(a) no deduction shall be admissible under this section to the
amalgamating or the demerged Unit for the previous year in which the
amalgamation or the demerger takes place; and
7 Deduction under section sections 80-IA and 80-IB are dealt with at Final Level
(b) the provisions of this section would apply to the amalgamated or
resulting Unit, as they would have applied to the amalgamating or the
demerged Unit had the amalgamation or demerger had not taken place.
ILLUSTRATION 21
Mr. Y furnishes you the following information for the year ended 31.3.2025:
Particulars ` (in lacs)
Total turnover of Unit A located in Special Economic Zone 100
Profit of the business of Unit A 30
Export turnover of Unit A received in India in convertible foreign 50
exchange on or before 30.9.2025
Total turnover of Unit B located in Domestic Tariff Area (DTA) 200
Profit of the business of Unit B 20
Compute deduction under section 10AA for the A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that Mr. Y
commenced operations in SEZ and DTA in the year 2019-20 and Mr. Y has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
SOLUTION
50% of the profit derived from export of articles or things or services is eligible for
deduction under section 10AA, since F.Y. 2024-25 is the sixth year commencing
from the year of manufacture or production of articles or things or provision of
services by the Unit in SEZ. As per section 10AA(7), the profit derived from export
of articles or things or services shall be the amount which bears to the profits of
the business of the undertaking, being the Unit, the same proportion as the export
turnover in respect of articles or things or services bears to the total turnover of
the business carried on by the undertaking.
Deduction under section 10AA
Export Turnover of Unit A
= Profit of the business of Unit A x x 50%
Total Turnover of Unit A
= ` 30 lakhs x x 50% = ` 7.5 lakhs
Note – No deduction under section 10AA is allowable in respect of profits of
business of Unit B located in DTA.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Deductions in respect of certain payments
Section Eligible Eligible Payments Permissible Deduction
Assessee
80C Individual or Contribution to PPF,
HUF Payment of LIC
premium, etc.
Sums paid or Sum paid or deposited,
deposited in the subject to a maximum of
previous year by way ` 1,50,000
of [Deduction would be
- Life insurance available only if the
premium individual/HUF exercises the
option of shifting out of the
- Contribution to
default tax regime provided
PPF/ SPF/RPF and
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
approved
superannuation
fund
- Repayment of
housing loan
taken from Govt.,
bank, LIC,
specified
employer etc.
- Tuition fees to
any Indian
university,
college, school
for full-time
education of any
two children
- Term deposit for
a fixed period of
not less than 5
years with
schedule bank
- Subscription to
notified bonds of
NABARD
- Five year post
office time
deposit
- Senior Citizen’s
Savings Scheme
Account etc.
- Contribution by
Central Govt.
employee to
additional
account (Tier II
A/c) of NPS
referred to u/s
80CCD
80CCC Individual Contribution to Amount paid or deposited,
certain pension subject to a maximum of
funds ` 1,50,000
Any amount paid or [Deduction would be
deposited to keep in available only if the
force a contract for individual exercises the
any annuity plan of option of shifting out of the
LIC of India or any default tax regime provided
other insurer for u/s 115BAC(1A)]
receiving pension
from the fund.
80CCD Individuals Contribution to Employee’s Contribution/
employed by Pension Scheme of Individual’ Contribution
the Central Central Government In case of a salaried individual,
Govt or any
An individual deduction of own contribution
other
employed by the u/s 80CCD(1) is restricted to
employer;
Central Government 10% of his salary.
Any other
on or after 1.1.2004 or In any other case, deduction
individual
any other employer u/s 80CCD(1) is restricted to
assessee.
or any other assessee, 20% of gross total income.
being an individual, Further, additional deduction
who has paid or of upto ` 50,000 is available
deposited any u/s 80CCD(1B).
amount in his account [Deduction u/s 80CCD(1) and
under a notified 80CCD(1B) would be
pension scheme [to available only if the
his individual pension individual exercises the
account [Tier I A/c] option of shifting out of the
under National default tax regime provided
Pension Scheme & u/s 115BAC(1A)]
Atal Pension Yojana]
Employer’s Contribution
The entire employer’s
contribution would be
included in the salary of the
employee. The deduction of
employer’s contribution under
section 80CCD(2) would be
restricted to 14% of salary,
where the employer is the
Central Government or State
Government; and 10% of salary
(14% under default tax regime),
in case of any other employer.
[Deduction u/s 80CCD(2)
would be available
irrespective of the regime
under which he pays tax.]
Note – As per section 80CCE, maximum permissible deduction u/s 80C, 80CCC
& 80CCD(1) is ` 1,50,000. However, the limit ` 1.50 lakh under section 80CCE
does not apply to deduction under section 80CCD(2) and 80CCD(1B).
80CCH Individual Contribution to Individual’ Contribution
Agniveer Corpus Whole of the amount paid or
Fund deposited
An individual enrolled [Deduction would be
in the Agnipath available only if the
Scheme and individual exercises the
subscribing to the option of shifting out of the
Agniveer Corpus default tax regime provided
Fund on or after under section 115BAC(1A)]
1.11 .2022, who has Central Government’s
paid or deposited any Contribution
amount in his account
The entire Central
in the Agniveer
Government’s contribution
Corpus Fund
to the Agniveer Corpus Fund
would be included in the
salary of the assessee.
Thereafter, deduction u/s
80CCH(2) would be available
for the same.
[Deduction u/s 80CCH(2)
would be available
irrespective of the regime
under which he pays tax]
80D Individual Medical Insurance
and HUF Premium
(1) Any premium
paid, otherwise
than by way of
cash, to keep in
Maximum ` 25,000
force an insurance
(` 50,000, in case the
on the health of –
individual or his or her
in case of self,
spouse is a senior citizen)
an spouse
individual and
dependent
children
in case of family
HUF member
(2) In case of an
individual,
contribution,
otherwise than by
way of cash, to
CGHS or any other
scheme as notified
by Central
Government.
(3) Any premium paid,
otherwise than by Maximum ` 25,000
way of cash, to keep (` 50,000, in case either or
in force an both of the parents are
insurance on the senior citizen(s))
health of parents,
whether or not
dependent on the
individual.
Notes:
(i) Any amount paid, Amount paid subject to a cap
otherwise than by of ` 50,000 (in case one
way of cash, on parent is a senior citizen, in
account of medical respect of whom insurance
expenditure premium is paid, and the
incurred on the other is a senior citizen on
health of the whom medical expenditure is
assessee or his incurred, the total deduction
family member or cannot exceed ` 50,000)
his parent, who is a
senior citizen and
no amount has
been paid to effect
or to keep in force
an insurance on
the health of such
person.
(ii) Payment, Amount paid subject to a cap
including cash of ` 5,000, in aggregate
payment, for (subject to the overall
preventive health individual limits of
check up of ` 25,000/ ` 50,000, as the
himself, spouse, case may be)
dependent [Deduction would be
children and available only if the
parents. individual/HUF exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
80DD Resident Maintenance Flat deduction of ` 75,000.
Individual or including medical In case of severe disability
HUF treatment of a (i.e. person with 80% or more
dependant disabled disability) the flat deduction
Any amount incurred shall be ` 1,25,000.
for the medical [Deduction would be
treatment (including available only if the
nursing), training and individual/HUF exercises the
rehabilitation of a option of shifting out of the
dependent disabled default tax regime provided
and / or u/s 115BAC(1A)]
Any amount paid or
deposited under the
scheme framed in this
behalf by the LIC or
any other insurer or
Administrator or
Specified Company
and approved by
Board.
Meaning of
Dependant
(1) (2)
In case of Dependant
An Spouse,
individual children,
parents,
brothers,
sisters
A HUF Any member
Persons mentioned in
column (2) should be
wholly or mainly
dependant on the
person mentioned in
corresponding column
(1) for support and
maintenance. Such
persons should not
have claimed
deduction under
section 80U in
computing total
income of that year.
80DDB Resident Deduction for Actual sum paid or
Individual or medical treatment ` 40,000 (` 1,00,000, if the
HUF of specified diseases payment is for medical
or ailments treatment of a senior citizen),
Amount paid for whichever is less,
specified diseases or minus
ailment the amount received from the
insurance company or
Assessee Amount
reimbursed by the employer.
spent
[Deduction would be available
An For himself only if the individual/HUF
individual or his
exercises the option of shifting
dependant
out of the default tax regime
being
provided under section
spouse,
115BAC(1A)]
children,
parents,
brothers or
sisters wholly
or mainly
dependant
on the
individual for
support and
maintenance
A HUF For any
member
80E Individual Interest on loan The deduction is available for
taken for higher interest payment in the initial
education assessment year (year of
Interest on loan taken commencement of interest
from any financial payment) and seven
institution or assessment years
appr oved charitable immediately succeeding the
institution. initial assessment year
Such loan is taken for (or)
pursuing his higher until the interest is paid in full
education or higher by the assessee, whichever is
education of his or earlier.
her relative i.e.,
[Deduction would be
spouse or children of
available only if the
the individual or the
individual exercises the
student for whom the
option of shifting out of the
individual is the legal
default tax regime provided
guardian.
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80EE Individuals Deduction for Deduction of upto
interest on loan ` 50,000 would be allowed in
borrowed from any respect of interest on loan
financial institution taken from a FI.
[bank/housing Conditions:
finance company
Loan should be sanctioned
(HFC)] for
during P.Y.2016-17
acquisition of
Loan sanctioned ≤ ` 35 lakhs
residential house
Value of house ≤ ` 50 lakhs
property
The assessee should not own
any residential house on the
date of sanction of loan.
[Deduction would be
available only if the
individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80EEA Individual Deduction in respect Deduction of upto
of interest payable ` 1,50,000 would be allowed
on loan taken from a in respect of interest payable
FI (bank or HFC) for on loan taken from a FI for
acquisition of acquisition of house
residential house property.
property
Conditions:
• Loan should be
sanctioned by a FI during
the period between 1st
April 2019 to 31st March
2022.
• Stamp Duty Value of
house ≤ ` 45 lakhs
• The individual should not
own any residential house
on the date of sanction of
loan.
• The individual should not
be eligible to claim
deduction u/s 80EE.
[Deduction would be
available only if the
individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
80EEB Individual Deduction in respect Deduction of upto
of interest payable ` 1,50,000 would be allowed
on loan taken from a in respect of interest payable
FI (bank or certain on loan taken for purchase of
NBFCs) for purchase electric vehicle.
of electric vehicle Loan should be sanctioned
by a FI during the period
from 1.4.2019 to 31.3.2023.
[Deduction would be
available only if the
individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
80G All assessees Donations to certain funds, charitable institutions etc.
There are four categories of deductions –
Category Donee
(I) 100% deduction Prime Minister’s National
of amount Relief Fund, National
donated, without Children’s Fund, Swachh
any qualifying Bharat Kosh, National
limit Defence Fund, PM CARES
Fund etc.
(II) 50% deduction of Prime Minister’s Drought
amount donated, Relief Fund.
without any
qualifying limit
(III) 100% deduction of Government or local
amount donated, authority, institution for
subject to promotion of family
qualifying limit planning etc.
(IV) 50% deduction of Government or any local
amount donated, authority to be used for
subject to charitable purpose, other
qualifying limit. than promotion of family
planning, notified temple,
church, gurudwara,
mosque etc.
Calculation of Qualifying limit for Category III &
IV donations:
Step 1: Compute adjusted total income, i.e., the gross
total income as reduced by the following:
1. Deductions under Chapter VI-A, except u/s 80G
2. Short term capital gains taxable u/s 111A
3. Long term capital gains taxable u/s 112 & 112A
Step 2: Calculate 10% of adjusted total income.
Step 3: Calculate the actual donation, which is subject
to qualifying limit
Step 4: Lower of Step 2 or Step 3 is the maximum
permissible deduction.
Step 5: The said deduction is adjusted first against
donations qualifying for 100% deduction (i.e.,
Category III donations). Thereafter, 50% of balance
qualifies for deduction under section 80G.
Note - No deduction shall be allowed for donation in
excess of ` 2,000, if paid in cash.
[In case of individuals, HUF, AoP (other than a co-
operative society) or BoI or an artificial juridical
person, deduction would be available only if they
exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)]
80GG Individual Rent paid for Least of the following is
not in receipt residential allowable as deduction:
of house rent accommodation (1) 25% of total income;
allowance (2) Rent paid – 10% of total
income
(3) ` 5,000 p.m.
No deduction if any
residential accommodation
is owned by the assessee/his
spouse/minor child/HUF at
the place where he
ordinarily resides or
performs the duties of his
office or employment or
carries on his business or
profession.
[Deduction would be
available only if the
individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80GGA Any assessee Donations for Actual donation
not having scientific research [No deduction shall be
income and rural allowed for donation in
chargeable development excess of ` 2,000, if paid in
under the cash]
head “Profits
and gains of [Deduction would be
business or available to individual, HUF,
profession” AoP (other than a co-
operative society) or BoI or
an artificial juridical person
only if they exercise the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
80GGB Indian Contributions to Actual contribution
company political parties (otherwise than by way of
(not opting Any sum contributed cash)
for section by it to a registered
115BAA/ political party or an
115BAB) electoral trust.
80GGC Any person, Contributions to Actual contribution
other than political parties (otherwise than by way of
local authority Amount contributed cash)
and an to a registered [An individual, HUF, AoP
artificial political party or an (other than a co-operative
juridical electoral trust. society) or BoI would be
person
eligible for deduction u/s
funded by the
80GGC only if the assessee
Government.
exercise the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime
provided u/s 115BAC(1A)]
Deductions in respect of Certain Incomes
As per section 80AC, furnishing return of income on or before due date is
mandatory for claiming deduction in respect of certain incomes.
Section Eligible Eligible Income Permissible Deduction
Assessee
80JJAA An Deduction in respect 30% of additional employee
assessee of employment of new cost incurred in the previous
to whom employees year.
section Deduction is allowable for 3
44AB assessment years including
applies, assessment year relevant to
whose the previous year in which
Gross such employment is
total provided.
income [Deduction would be
includes available irrespective of the
profits regime under which the
and gains employer pays tax]
derived
from
business
80QQB Resident Royalty income, etc., Income derived in the
individual, of authors of certain exercise of profession or
being an books other than text ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.
author books
In respect of royalty or
Consideration for
copyright fee received
assignment or grant of
otherwise than by way of
any of his interests in
lumpsum, income to be
the copyright of any
restricted to 15% of value of
book, being a work of
books sold during the
literary, artistic or
relevant previous year.
scientific nature or
[Deduction would be
royalty or copyright
available only if the
fee received as
individual exercises the
lumpsum or otherwise.
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A)]
80RRB Resident Royalty on patents Whole of such income or
individual, ` 3,00,000, whichever is less.
Any income by way of
being a
royalty on patents [Deduction would be
patentee
registered on or after available only if the
1.4.2003 individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
Deductions in respect of Ot her Income
Section Eligible Eligible Income Permissible Deduction
Assessee
80TTA Individual Interest on deposits in Actual interest subject to a
or a HUF, savings account maximum of ` 10,000.
other than Interest on deposits in a [Deduction would be
a resident savings account with a available only if the
senior bank, a co-operative individual/HUF exercises the
citizen society or a post office option of shifting out of the
(not being time default tax regime provided
deposits, which are u/s 115BAC(1A)]
repayable on expiry of
fixed periods)
80TTB Resident Interest on deposits Actual interest or ` 50,000,
senior Interest on deposits whichever is less.
citizen (i.e. (both fixed deposits [Deduction would be
an and saving accounts) available only if the
individual of with banking individual exercises the
the age of company, co- option of shifting out of the
60 years or operative society default tax regime provided
more at any engaged in the u/s 115BAC(1A)]
time during business of banking or
the previous a post office.
year)
Other Deductions
Section Eligible Condition for Permissible Deduction
Assessee deduction
80U Resident Deduction in case of Flat deduction of ` 75,000, in
Individual a person with case of a person with disability.
disability Flat deduction of ` 1,25,000,
Any person, who is in case of a person with
certified by the severe disability (80% or
medical authority to more disability).
be a person with [Deduction would be
disability. available only if the
individual exercises the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
Deduction under section 10AA
Section Eligible Eligible Income Permissible Deduction
Assessee
10AA An assessee Profits derived from Deduction for 15 consecutive
who derives exports of such assessment years
profits from articles or things or Amount of deduction =
an under- export of services Profits of Unit in SEZ x
taking, being (including computer
a Unit software).
established Conditions for
in SEZ, which deduction
begins to 1. Proceeds to be
manufacture received in
or produce convertible
articles or foreign exchange
things or within 6 months
provide any from the end of
service on or the P.Y. or such
after further period as
1.4.2005 but the competent
before authority may
1.4.2021 allow in this
behalf.
2. The report of
chartered
accountant
certifying that the
deduction has
been correctly
claimed should
be furnished
before the date
specified in
section 44AB.
3. Return of
income to be
filed on or
before due date
u/s 139(1).
E x
T
p
o
o
t a
r t t
l t u
u
r
r
n
n
o
o
v
v
e
e
r
r o
o f
f U
U n
n it S
it S E
E
Z
Z
Years 1 to 5 - 100% of such
profits would be exempt in
the first five years;
Years 6 to 10 - 50% of such
profits in the next five years;
and
Years 11 to 15 - In the last
five years, 50% of such
profits subject to transfer to
SEZ Re-investment Reserve
Account.
[In case of individuals, HUF,
AoP (other than a co-
operative society), BoI or an
artificial juridical person,
deduction would be available
only if they exercise the
option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided
u/s 115BAC(1A)]
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Examine the following statements with regard to the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961:
(i) During the financial year 2024-25, Mr. Amit paid interest on loan availed
by him for his son's higher education. His son is already employed in a
firm. Mr. Amit will get the deduction under section 80E.
(ii) Subscription to notified bonds of NABARD would qualify for deduction
under section 80C.
(iii) In order to be eligible to claim deduction under section 80C, investment/
contribution/ subscription etc. in eligible or approved modes, should be
made from out of income chargeable to tax.
(iv) Where an individual repays a sum of ` 30,000 towards principal and
` 14,000 as interest in respect of loan taken from a bank for pursuing
eligible higher studies, the deduction allowable under section 80E is
` 44,000 irrespective of the tax regime.
(v) Mrs. Sheela, widow of Mr. Satish (who was an employee of M/s. XYZ Ltd.),
received ` 7 lakhs on 1.5.2024, being amount standing to the credit of
Mr. Satish in his NPS Account, in respect of which deduction has been
allowed under section 80CCD to Mr. Satish in the earlier previous years.
Such amount received by her as a nominee on closure of the account is
deemed to be her income for A.Y.2025-26.
(vi) Mr. Vishal, a Central Government employee, contributed ` 50,000
towards Tier II account of NPS. The same would be eligible for deduction
under section 80CCD. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
2. Examine the allowability of the following if the assessees have exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A):
(i) Rajan, a resident individual, has to pay to a hospital for treatment
` 62,000 and spent nothing for life insurance or for maintenance of
dependent disabled.
(ii) Varun, a resident Indian, has spent nothing for treatment in the previous
year and deposited ` 25,000 with LIC for maintenance of dependant
disabled.
(iii) Hari, a resident individual, has incurred ` 20,000 for treatment and
` 25,000 was deposited with LIC for maintenance of dependant disabled.
3. For the A.Y. 2025-26, the Gross total income of Mr. Chaturvedi, a resident in
India, was ` 8,18,240 which includes long-term capital gain of ` 2,45,000
taxable under section 112 and Short-term capital gain of ` 58,000. The Gross
total income also includes interest income of ` 12,000 from savings bank
deposits with banks and ` 40,000 interest on fixed deposits with banks.
Mr. Chaturvedi has invested in PPF ` 1,20,000 and also paid a medical
insurance premium ` 51,000. Mr. Chaturvedi also contributed ` 50,000 to
Public Charitable Trust eligible for deduction under section 80G by way of an
account payee cheque. Compute the total income and tax thereon of
Mr. Chaturvedi, who is 70 years old as on 31.3.2025, in a tax efficient manner.
4. Mr. Rajmohan whose gross total income was ` 6,40,000 for the financial year
2024-25, furnishes you the following information:
(i) Repayment of loan taken from SBI for acquisition of residential house
(self-occupied) - ` 50,000.
(ii) Five year post office time deposit - ` 20,000.
(iii) Donation to a recognized charitable trust ` 25,000 which is eligible for
deduction under section 80G at the applicable rate.
(iv) Interest on loan taken for higher education of spouse paid during the year
- ` 10,000.
Compute the total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y. 2025-26 if he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
5. Compute the eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A for the A.Y. 2025-26 of
Ms. Roma, aged 40 years, who has a gross total income of ` 15,00,000 for the
A.Y. 2025-26 and has ex ercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). She provides the following
information about her investments/payments during the P.Y. 2024-25:
Sl. Particulars Amount
No. (` )
1. Life Insurance premium paid (Policy taken on 31-03- 35,000
2012 and sum assured is ` 4,70,000)
2. Public Provident Fund contribution 1,50,000
3. Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila Bank, 20,000
Bangalore
4. Payment to L.I.C. Pension Fund 1,40,000
5. Mediclaim Policy taken for self, wife and dependent 30,000
children, premium paid by cheque
6. Medical Insurance premium paid by cheque for 52,000
parents (Senior Citizens)
6. Mr. Rudra has one unit at Special Economic Zone (SEZ) and other unit at
Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). He provides the following details for the previous
year 2024-25.
Particulars Mr. Rudra (`) Unit in DTA (`)
Total Sales 6,00,00,000 2,00,00,000
Export Sales 5,60,00,000 1,60,00,000
Net Profit 80,00,000 20,00,000
Proceeds from export sales in SEZ received in convertible foreign exchange by
30.9.2025 is ` 3,00,00,000. He has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). Calculate the eligible
deduction under section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961, for the Assessment
Year 2025-26 if both the units were set up and start manufacturing from 22-
05-2016.
ANSWERS
1. (i) The statement is correct. The deduction under section 80E is available
to an individual in respect of interest on loan taken for his higher
education or for the higher education of his relative only if he exercises
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A). For this purpose, relative means, inter alia, spouse
and children of the individual. Therefore, Mr. Amit will get the deduction
under section 80E in respect of interest on loan availed by him for his
son’s higher education, if he exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A). It is immaterial
that his son is already employed in a firm. This would not affect
Mr. Amit’s eligibility for deduction under section 80E.
(ii) The statement is correct. Under section 80C(2) subscription to such
bonds issued by NABARD (as the Central Government may notify in the
Official Gazette) would qualify for deduction under section 80C, if the
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(iii) The statement is not correct. There is no stipulation under section 80C
that the investment, subscription, etc. should be made from out of
income chargeable to tax.
(iv) The statement is not correct. An individual would not be eligible for
deduction u/s 80E if he pays tax under default tax regime under section
115BAC. If he has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), deduction under section
80E would be available in respect of interest paid on education loan.
Hence, the deduction will be limited to interest of ` 14,000, if he has
exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
(v) The statement is not correct. The proviso to section 80CCD(3)
provides that the amount received by the nominee, on closure of NPS
account on the death of the assessee, shall not be deemed to be the
income of the nominee. Hence, amount received by Mrs. Sheela would
not be deemed to be her income for A.Y. 2025-26.
(vi) The statement is not correct. Contribution to Tier II account of NPS
would qualify for deduction under section 80C and not section 80CCD.
2. (i) The deduction of ` 75,000 under section 80DD is allowable to Rajan,
irrespective of the amount of expenditure incurred or paid by him. If
the expenditure is incurred in respect of a dependant with severe
disability, the deduction allowable is ` 1,25,000.
(ii) The assessee Varun has deposited ` 25,000 for maintenance of
dependent disabled. He is, however, eligible to claim ` 75,000 since the
deduction of ` 75,000 is allowed, irrespective of the amount deposited
with LIC. In the case of dependant with severe disability, the deduction
allowable is ` 1,25,000.
(iii) Section 80DD allows a deduction of ` 75,000 irrespective of the actual
amount spent on maintenance of a dependent disabled and/or actual
amount deposited with LIC. Therefore, the deduction will be ` 75,000
even though the total amount incurred/deposited is only ` 45,000. If
the dependant is a person with severe disability the quantum of
deduction is ` 1,25,000.
3. Computation of total income and tax liability of
Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime
Particulars `
Gross total income incl. long term capital gain 8,18,240
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A -
No deduction would be available under default tax
regime u/s 115BAC
Total income 8,18,240
Tax on total income
LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20% 49,000
Balance total income ` 5,73,240 13,662
62,662
Add: Health and Education cess @4% 2,506
Total tax liability 65,168
Total tax liability (Rounded off) 65,170
Computation of total income and tax liability of
Mr. Chaturvedi for the A.Y. 2025-26 under the optional tax regime
(i.e., the normal provisions of the Act)
Particulars ` `
Gross total income incl. long term capital gain 8,18,240
Less: Long term capital gain 2,45,000
5,73,240
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Under section 80C in respect of PPF deposit 1,20,000
Under section 80D (it is assumed that premium of 50,000
` 51,000 is paid by otherwise than by cash. The
deduction would be restricted to ` 50,000, since
Mr. Chaturvedi is a senior citizen)
Under section 80G (See Notes 1 & 2 below) 17,662
Under section 80TTB (See Note 3 below) 50,000 2,37,662
Total income (excluding long term capital gains) 3,35,578
Total income (including long term capital gains) 5,80,578
Total income (rounded off) 5,80,580
Tax on total income (including long-term capital
gains of ` 2,45,000)
LTCG ` 2,45,000 x 20% 49,000
Balance total income ` 3,35,580 (See Note 4 below) 1,779
50,779
Add: Health and Education cess @4% 2,031
Total tax liability 52,810
Since the tax liability is lower under the optional tax regime (i.e., normal
provisions of the Act) as compared to the default tax regime, Mr. Chaturvedi
should exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
Notes:
1. Computation of deduction under section 80G:
Particulars `
Gross total income (excluding long term capital gains) 5,73,240
Less: Deduction under section 80C, 80D & 80TTB 2,20,000
3,53,240
10% of the above 35,324
Contribution made 50,000
Lower of the two eligible for deduction under section 35,324
80G
Deduction under section 80G – 50% of ` 35,324 17,662
2. Deduction under section 80G is allowed only if amount is paid by any
mode other than cash, in case of amount exceeding ` 2,000. Therefore,
the contribution made to public charitable trust is eligible for deduction
since it is made by way of an account payee cheque.
3. Deduction of upto ` 50,000 under section 80TTB is allowed to a senior
citizen if gross total income includes interest income on bank deposits,
both fixed deposits and savings account.
4. Mr. Chaturvedi, being a senior citizen is eligible for a higher basic
exemption of ` 3,00,000.
4. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajmohan for the A.Y.2025-26
Particulars ` `
Gross Total Income 6,40,000
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A
Under section 80C
Repayment of loan taken for acquisition of 50,000
residential house
Five year time deposit with Post Office 20,000
70,000
Under section 80E
Interest on loan taken for higher education of 10,000
spouse, being a relative.
Under section 80G (See Note below)
Donation to recognized charitable trust
(50% of ` 25,000) 12,500 92,500
Total Income 5,47,500
Note: In case of deduction under section 80G in respect of donation to a
charitable trust, the net qualifying amount has to be restricted to 10% of adjusted
total income, i.e., gross total income less deductions under Chapter VI-A except
80G. The adjusted total income is, therefore, ` 5,60,000 (i.e. 6,40,000 – ` 80,000),
10% of which is ` 56,000, which is higher than the actual donation of ` 25,000.
Therefore, the deduction under section 80G would be ` 12,500, being 50% of the
actual donation of ` 25,000.
5. Computation of eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A of
Ms. Roma for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars ` `
Deduction under section 80C
Life insurance premium paid ` 35,000 35,000
(allowed in full since the same is within the limit of
20% of the sum assured, the policy being taken
before 1.4.2012)
Public Provident Fund 1,50,000
Repayment of housing loan to Bhartiya Mahila
Bank, Bangalore 20,000
2,05,000
Restricted to a maximum of ` 1,50,000 1,50,000
Deduction under section 80CCC for payment
towards LIC pension fund 1,40,000
2,90,000
As per section 80CCE, aggregate deduction under, 1,50,000
inter alia, section 80C and 80CCC, is restricted to
Deduction under section 80D
Payment of medical insurance premium of ` 30,000
towards medical policy taken for self, wife and
dependent children restricted to 25,000
Medical insurance premium paid ` 52,000 for
parents, being senior citizens, restricted to 50,000 75,000
Eligible deduction under Chapter VI-A 2,25,000
6. Computation of deduction u/s 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961
As per section 10AA, in computing the total income of Mr. Rudra from his
unit located in a Special Economic Zone (SEZ), which begins to manufacture
or produce articles or things or provide any services during the previous year
relevant to the assessment year commencing on or after 01.04.2006 but
before 01.04.2021, there shall be allowed a deduction of 100% of the profit
and gains derived from export of such articles or things or from services for
a period of five consecutive assessment years beginning with the assessment
year relevant to the previous year in which the Unit begins to manufacture or
produce such articles or things or provide services, as the case may be, and
50% of such profits for further five assessment years.
Since Mr. Rudra has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for
deduction u/s 10AA.
The deduction u/s 10AA would be available only if Mr. Rudra furnishes report
of chartered accountant before the date specified in section 44AB and files
return of income on or before due date u/s 139(1).
Since A.Y. 2025-26 is the 9th assessment year from A.Y. 2017-18, relevant
to the previous year 2016-17, in which the SEZ unit began manufacturing of
articles or things, it shall be eligible for deduction of 50% of the profits
derived from export of such articles or things, assuming all the other
conditions specified in section 10AA are fulfilled.
Export turnover of Unit in SEZ x 50%
= Profits of Unit in SEZ x
Total turnover of Unit in SEZ
300 lakhs x 50% = ` 22.50 lakhs
= 60 lakhs x
400 lakhs
Export turnover of Unit in SEZ is the export sales in SEZ received in
convertible foreign exchange by 30.9.2025 which is ` 3,00,00,000.
The unit set up in Domestic Tariff Area is not eligible for the benefit of
deduction u/s 10AA in respect of its export profits, in both the situations.
Working Note:
Computation of total sales, export sales and net profit of unit in SEZ
Particulars Rudra Ltd. (`) Unit in DTA (`) Unit in SEZ (`)
Total Sales 6,00,00,000 2,00,00,000 4,00,00,000
Export Sales 4,60,00,000 1,60,00,000 3,00,00,000
Net Profit 80,00,000 20,00,000 60,00,000
7
CHAPTE R
ADVANCE TAX, TAX
DEDUCTION AT SOURCE
AND TAX COLLECTION
AT SOURCE
9.1
LEARNING OUTCOMES
A fter studying this chapter, you would be able to–
 appreciate the modes of recovery of income-tax from an
assessee;
 comprehend and apply the provisions governing deduction
of tax at source from certain specified income and
payments;
 examine whether tax is deductible in a particular case(s)
considering the provisions of the relevant section;
 compute the tax deductible at source in respect of a
particular case(s);
 identify the cases where tax is not required to be deducted
at source and the conditions to be satisfied for this purpose;
 comprehend and appreciate the duty of the person
deducting tax;
 examine the consequences of failure to deduct tax at
source or make payment of the tax deducted at source;
 appreciate when the liability to pay advance tax arises;
 compute advance tax liability and the schedule of
instalments for payment of advance tax;
 comprehend the concept of tax collection at source and
appreciate when tax is collectible at source;
 appreciate the difference between tax deduction at source
and tax collection at source.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.3
a
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Tax deduction Tax collection
Advance Tax
at source at source
Deduction of tax at Liability to pay Collection of tax
source advance tax at source
[Section 192 to 196] [Section 207 to 208] [Section 206C]
Certificate of Computation of TCS for non-
deduction of tax at advance tax filers of income-
a lower rate tax return and
[Section 209]
[Section 197] non-furnishers
of PAN [Section
Instalments of 206CCA &
No deduction of tax
advance tax and due 206CC]
in certain cases
dates
[Section 197A]
[Section 211]
Difference
between TDS
Miscellaneous
Credit for advance and TCS
Provisions
tax
[Section 198 to
[Section 219]
206AB] Common
Number for TDS
Interest on non- and TCS
payment / short [Section 203A]
payment or deferment
of advance tax
[Section 234B & 234C]
1. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE AND
ADVANCE PAYMENT [SECTION 190]
The total income of an assessee for the previous year is taxable in the relevant
assessment year. For example, the total income for the P.Y. 2024-25 is taxable in
the A.Y. 2025-26. However, income-tax is recovered from the assessee in the
previous year itself through –
(1) Tax deduction at source (TDS)
(2) Tax collection at source (TCS)
(3) Payment of advance tax
Another mode of recovery of tax is from the employer through tax paid by him
under section 192(1A) on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the
employee.
These taxes are deductible from the total tax due from the assessee. The assessee,
while filing his return of income, has to pay self-assessment tax under section
140A, if tax is due on the total income as per his return of income after adjusting,
inter alia, TDS, TCS, relief of tax claimed under section 89, tax credit claimed to be
set off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A), any tax or interest payable according to the provisions of
section 191(2) and advance tax.
2. DIRECT PAYMENT [SECTION 191]
Direct payment of tax - Section 191(1) provides that in the following cases, tax is
payable by the assessee directly –
(i) in the case of income in respect of which tax is not required to be deducted
at source; and
(ii) income in respect of which tax is liable to be deducted but is not actually
deducted.
In view of this provision, the proceedings for recovery of tax necessarily had to be
taken against the assessee whose tax was liable to be deducted, but not
deducted.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5
a
In order to overcome this difficulty, the Explanation to this section provides that if
any person, including the principal officer of a company –
(i) who is required to deduct tax at source; or
(ii) an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section 192(1A),
does not deduct, or after deducting fails to pay such tax, or does not pay, the
whole or part of the tax, then, such person shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-
default.
However, if the assessee himself has paid the tax, this provision will not apply.
3. DEDUCTION OF TAX AT SOURCE
3.1 Salary [Section 192]
(1) Applicability of TDS under section 192
This section casts an obligation on every person responsible for paying any
income chargeable to tax under the head ‘Salaries’ to deduct income-tax at
the time of payment on the amount payable.
(2) Manner of deduction of tax
(i) Such income-tax has to be calculated at the average rate of income-
tax computed on the basis of the rates in force for the relevant
financial year in which the payment is made, on the estimated total
income of the assessee where the employee intimates to the employer
his intent to exercise the option of shifting out of the default tax
regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(ii) Average rate of income-tax means the rate arrived at by dividing the
amount of income-tax calculated on the total income, by such total
income.
(iii) A deductor, being an employer, has to seek information from each of
its employees having income under section 192 regarding their
intended tax regime and each such employee would intimate the
same to the deductor, being his employer, regarding his intended tax
regime for each year and upon intimation, the deductor has to
compute his total income, and deduct tax at source thereon according
to the option exercised.
If intimation is not made by the employee, it would be presumed that
the employee continues to be in the default tax regime u/s 115BAC
and has not exercised the option to opt out of the default tax regime.
Accordingly, in such a case, the employer has to deduct tax at source,
on income under section 192, in accordance with the rates provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
It is also clarified that the intimation would not amount to exercising
option under section 115BAC(6) and the person shall be required to
do so separately in accordance with the provisions of that section
[Circular No. 4/2023 dated 5.4.2023].
(iv) The concept of payment of tax on non-monetary perquisites has been
provided in sections 192(1A) and (1B). These sections provide that the
employer may pay this tax, at his option, in lieu of deduction of tax at
source from salary payable to the employee. Such tax will have to be
worked out at the average rate applicable to aggregate salary income
of the employee and payment of tax will have to be made every
month along with tax deducted at source on monetary payment of
salary, allowances etc.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. A, the employer, pays gross salary including allowances and
monetary perquisites amounting to ` 7,30,000 to his General Manager.
Besides, the employer provides non-monetary perquisites to him
whose value is estimated at ` 1,20,000. The General Manager is
exercising the option to shift out of the default tax regime and pay tax
under the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
What is the tax implication in the hands of Mr. A, the employer and
General Manager, the employee?
SOLUTION
`
Gross salary, allowances and monetary perquisites 7,30,000
Non-Monetary perquisites 1,20,000
8,50,000
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 50,000
8,00,000
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7
a
Tax Liability 75,400
Average rate of tax (` 75,400 / ` 8,00,000 × 100) 9.425%
Mr. A can deduct ` 75,400 at source from the salary of the General
Manager at the time of payment.
Alternatively, Mr. A can pay tax on non-monetary perquisites as under –
Tax on non-monetary perquisites = 9.425% of ` 1,20,000 = ` 11,310
Balance to be deducted from salary = ` 64,090
If Mr. A pays tax of ` 11,310 on non-monetary perquisites, the same is
not a deductible expenditure as per section 40(a). The amount of tax
paid towards non-monetary perquisite by the employer, however, is
not chargeable to tax in the hands of the employee as per section
10(10CC).
(v) In cases where an assessee is employed simultaneously under more
than one employer or the assessee takes up a job with another
employer during the financial year after his resignation or retirement
from the services of the former employer, he may furnish the details of
the income under the head “Salaries” due or received by him from the
other employer, the tax deducted therefrom and such other particulars
to his current employer. Thereupon, the subsequent employer should
take such information into consideration and then deduct the tax
remaining payable in respect of the employee’s remuneration from
both the employers put together for the relevant financial year.
(vi) In respect of salary payments to employees of Government or to
employees of companies, co-operative societies, local authorities,
universities, institutions, associations or bodies, deduction of tax at
source should be made after allowing relief u/s 89, where eligible.
(vii) A tax payer receiving salary has, in addition, other income chargeable
to tax for that financial year, may send to the employer, the following
particulars of:
(a) such other income and of any tax deducted under any other
provision;
(b) loss, if any, under the head ‘Income from house property’ if the
assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A).
The employer shall take the above particulars into account while
calculating tax deductible at source.
To avoid the cash flow issues for employees, the scope of section
192(1B) has been extended to include any tax deducted or collected
at source to be taken into account for the purposes of making the
deduction under section 192. Accordingly, w.e.f. 1.10.2024, an employee
can inform his employer for a financial year, the details of the following:
(a) such other income chargeable to tax (not being a loss under any
such head;
(b) any tax deducted or collected under any other provision of the Act;
and
(c) loss, if any, under the head “Income from house property” if the
assessee intimated to the employer his intent to exercise the option
of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A),
in prescribed form and manner and thereupon the person responsible to
deduct tax shall take into account the above particulars while
calculating tax deductible at source.
However, it has to be noted that on account of submission of the
above details, the tax deducted at source on salaries should not be
reduced except with respect to loss from house property (allowable to
the extent of ` 2,00,000) and tax deducted at source and tax collected
at source.
(3) Furnishing of statement of particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of
salary by employer to employee
The employer shall furnish to the employee, a statement in Form No. 12BA
giving correct and complete particulars of perquisites or profits in lieu of
salary provided to him and the value thereof. The statement shall be in the
prescribed form and manner. This requirement is applicable only where the
salary paid/payable to an employee exceeds ` 1,50,000. For other
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9
a
employees, the particulars of perquisites/profits in lieu of salary shall be
given in Form 16 itself.
(4) Circular issued by CBDT
Every year, the CBDT issues a circular giving details and direction to all
employers for the purpose of deduction of tax from salaries payable to the
employees during the relevant financial year. These instructions should be
followed.
(5) Requirement to obtain evidence/ proof/ particulars of claims from the
employee by the employer
Sub-section (2D) casts responsibility on the person responsible for paying
any income chargeable under the head “Salaries” to obtain from the
assessee, the evidence or proof or particulars of prescribed claims (including
claim for set-off of loss) under the provisions of the Act in the prescribed
form and manner, for the purposes of –
(1) estimating income of the assessee; or
(2) computing tax deductible under section 192(1).
In case an employee has intimated his employer of his intent to exercise the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A), Rule 26C requires furnishing of evidence of the following
claims by him to the person responsible for making payment under section
192(1) in Form No.12BB for the purpose of estimating his income or
computing the amount of tax to be deducted at source:
S. Nature of Claim Evidence or particulars
No.
1. House Rent Allowance Name, address and PAN of the
landlord(s) where the aggregate rent
paid during the previous year
exceeds ` 1 lakh.
2. Leave Travel Concession Evidence of expenditure
or Assistance
3. Deduction of interest Name, address and PAN of the lender
under the head “Income
from house property”
4. Deduction under Evidence of investment or
Chapter VI-A expenditure.
3.2 Interest on securities [Section 193]
(1) Person responsible for deduction of tax at source
This section casts responsibility on every person responsible for paying to a
resident any income by way of interest on securities.
(2) Meaning of interest on securities [Section 2(28B)]
Interest on securities means -
(i) interest on any security of the Central Government or a State
Government
(ii) interest on debentures or other securities for money issued by or on
behalf of a local authority or a company or a corporation established
by a Central, State or Provincial Act.
(3) Rate of TDS
Such person is vested with the responsibility to deduct income-tax at the
rates in force from the amount of interest payable.
The rate at which tax is deductible under section 193 is 10%, both in the
case of domestic companies and non-corporate resident assessees.
(4) Time of tax deduction at source
Tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such income to the account
of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of a
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where any income by way of interest on securities is credited to any
account in the books of account of the person liable to pay such income,
such crediting is deemed to be credit of such income to the account of the
payee and tax has to be deducted at source. The account to which such
interest is credited may be called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense
account” or by any other name.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 1
a
(5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 193
No tax deduction is to be made from any interest payable:
(i) on National Development Bonds;
(ii) on 7-year National Savings Certificates (IV Issue);
(iii) on debentures issued by any institution or authority or any public
sector company or any co-operative society (including a co-operative
land mortgage bank or a co-operative land development bank), as
notified by the Central Government;
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 27
& 28/2018, dated 18-06-2018, notified-
(i) “Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond”
issued by Power Finance Corporation Limited {PFCL} and
(ii) “Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains
Bond” issued by Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited
{IRFCL}
Thus, no tax is required to be deducted at source on interest payable
on “Power Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond” and
“Indian Railway Finance Corporation Limited 54EC Capital Gains Bond”.
(iv) on any security of the Central Government or a State Government
Note – It may be noted that tax has to be deducted at source in
respect of interest payable on 8% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2003, or
7.75% Savings (Taxable) Bonds, 2018, only if such interest payable
exceeds
` 10,000 during the financial year.
With effect from 1.10.2024, tax is required to be deducted in respect of
interest payable on Floating Rate Savings Bonds, 2020 (Taxable) or any
other notified security of the Central Government or State Government
if such interest payable exceeds ` 10,000 during the financial year.
(v) on any debentures (whether listed or not listed on a recognized stock
exchange) issued by the company in which the public are substantially
interested to a resident individual or HUF. However,
(a) the interest should be paid by the company by an account payee
cheque;
(b) the amount of such interest or the aggregate thereof paid or
likely to be paid during the financial year by the company to
such resident individual or HUF should not exceed ` 5,000.
(vi) on securities to LIC, GIC, subsidiaries of GIC or any other insurer,
provided –
(a) the securities are owned by them or
(b) they have full beneficial interest in such securities.
3.3 Interest other than interest on securities [Section 194A]
This section deals with the scheme of deduction of tax at source from interest
other than interest on securities. The main provisions are the following:
(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194A
This section applies only to interest, other than “interest on securities”,
credited or paid by assessees other than individuals or Hindu undivided
family. However, an individual or Hindu undivided family whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him
exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession
during the immediately preceding financial year is liable to deduct tax at
source under this section.
(2) Time of tax deduction at source
The deduction of tax must be made at the time of crediting such interest to
the account of the payee or at the time of its payment in cash or by any
other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where any such interest is credited to any account in the books of account
of the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be
credit of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be
deducted at source. The account to which such interest is credited may be
called “Interest Payable account” or “Suspense account” or by any other
name.
The CBDT has, vide Circular No.3/2010 dated 2.3.2010, given a clarification
regarding deduction of tax at source on payment of interest on time
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 3
a
deposits under section 194A by banks following Core-branch Banking
Solutions (CBS) software. It has been clarified that Explanation to section
194A is not meant to apply in cases of banks where credit is made to
provisioning account on daily/monthly basis for the purpose of macro
monitoring only by the use of CBS software. It has been further clarified that
since no constructive credit to the depositor’s/payee’s account takes place
while calculating interest on time deposits on daily or monthly basis in the
CBS software used by banks, tax need not be deducted at source on such
provisioning of interest by banks for the purposes of macro monitoring
only. In such cases, tax shall be deducted at source on accrual of interest at
the end of financial year or at periodic intervals as per practice of the bank
or as per the depositor's/ payee's requirement or on maturity or on
encashment of time deposits, whichever event takes place earlier, whenever
the aggregate of amounts of interest income credited or paid or likely to be
credited or paid during the financial year by the banks exceeds the limits
specified in section 194A.
Note - The time for making the payment of tax deducted at source would
reckon from the date of credit of interest made constructively to the
account of the payee.
(3) Rate of TDS
The rate at which the deduction is to be made is given in Part II of the First
Schedule to the Annual Finance Act. The rate at which tax is to be deducted
is 10% both in the case of non-corporate resident assessees and domestic
companies.
(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194A
No deduction of tax shall be made in the following cases:
(a) If the aggregate amount of interest paid or credited during the
financial year does not exceed ` 5,000.
This limit is ` 40,000 where the payer is a –
(i) banking company;
(ii) a co-operative society engaged in banking business; and
(iii) post office and interest is credited or paid in respect of any
deposit under notified schemes (“Senior Citizens Saving Scheme,
2019” and “Mahila Samman Savings Certificate, 2023” have been
notified by the Central Government for this purpose)
In respect of (i), (ii) and (iii) above, the limit is ` 50,000, in case of
payee, being a senior citizen.
The limit will be calculated with respect to income credited or paid by
a branch of a banking company or a co-operative society or a public
company in case of:
(i) time deposits with a banking company
(ii) time deposits with a co-operative society carrying on the
business of banking; and
(iii) deposits with housing finance companies, provided:
- they are public companies formed and registered in India
- their main object is to carry on the business of providing
long-term finance for construction or purchase of houses
in India for residential purposes.
The threshold limit will be reckoned with reference to the total interest
credited or paid by the banking company or the co-operative society
or the public company, as the case may be, (and not with reference to
each branch), where such banking company or co-operative society or
public company has adopted core banking solutions.
Section 206A requires every banking company or co-operative society
or public company referred to in above to prepare such statement, for
such period as may be prescribed
- if they are responsible for paying to a resident,
- the payment should be of any income not exceeding ` 40,000,
where the payer is a banking company or a co-operative society,
and ` 5,000 in any other case and
- such income should be by way of interest (other than interest on
securities)
The statement should be in the prescribed form and should be
delivered to the DGIT (Systems) or person authorized by him.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 5
a
(b) Interest paid or credited by a firm to any of its partners;
(c) Interest paid or credited in respect of deposits under any scheme
framed by the Central Government and notified by it in this behalf;
(d) Interest income credited or paid in respect of deposits (other than
time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995) with a bank to which the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies;
(e) Income paid or credited by a co-operative society (other than a co-
operative bank) to a member thereof or to such income credited or
paid by a co-operative society to any other co-operative society;
(f) Interest income credited or paid in respect of -
(i) deposits with primary agricultural credit society or a primary
credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank or a co-
operative land development bank;
(ii) deposit (other than time deposits made on or after 1.7.1995)
with a co-operative society [other than cooperative society or
bank referred to in (i)] engaged in carrying on the business of
banking.
From a combined reading of (e) and (f), it can be inferred that a co-
operative bank other than mentioned in (i) above is required to
deduct tax at source on payment of interest on time deposit to its
members. However, it is not required to deduct tax from the payment
of interest on time deposit, to a depositor, being a co-operative
society.
However, a cooperative society referred to in (e) or (f) is liable to
deduct tax if –
(i) the total sales, gross receipts or turnover of the co-operative
society exceeds ` 50 crores during the financial year immediately
preceding the financial year in which interest is credited or paid;
and
(ii) the amount of interest or the aggregate amount of interest
credited or paid, or is likely to be credited or paid, during the
financial year is more than ` 50,000 in case of payee being a
senior citizen and ` 40,000, in any other case.
Thus, such co-operative society is required to deduct tax under
section 194A on interest credited or paid by it –
(a) to its member or to any other co-operative society; or
(b) in respect of deposits with a primary agricultural credit society
or a primary credit society or a co-operative land mortgage bank
or a co-operative land development bank or
(c) in respect of deposits with a co-operative bank other than a co-
operative society or bank engaged in carrying on the business of
banking
(g) Interest income credited or paid by the Central Government under any
provision of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(h) Interest paid or credited to the following entities:
(i) banking companies, or co-operative societies engaged in the
business of banking, including co-operative land mortgage
banks;
(ii) financial corporations established by or under any Central, State
or Provincial Act.
(iii) the Life Insurance Corporation of India.
(iv) companies and co-operative societies carrying on the business
of insurance.
(v) the Unit Trust of India; and
(vi) notified institution, association, body or class of institutions,
associations or bodies (National Skill Development Fund and
Housing and Urban Development Corporation Ltd. (HUDCO),
New Delhi have been notified by the Central Government for this
purpose).
(i) income credited by way of interest on the compensation amount
awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal;
(j) income paid by way of interest on the compensation amount awarded
by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal where the amount of such
income or, as the case may be, the aggregate of the amounts of such
income paid during the financial year does not exceed ` 50,000.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 7
a
(k) income paid or payable by an infrastructure capital company or
infrastructure capital fund or infrastructure debt fund or public sector
company or scheduled bank in relation to a zero coupon bond issued
on or after 1.6.2005.
Notes
(1) The expression “time deposits” [for the purpose of (4)(a), (d) and (f)
above] means the deposits, including recurring deposits, repayable
on the expiry of fixed periods.
(2) Senior citizen means an individual resident in India who is of the age
of 60 years or more at any time during the relevant previous year.
(5) Power to the Central Government to issue notification
The Central Government is empowered to issue notification for non-
deduction of tax at source or deduction of tax at a lower rate, from such
payment to such person or class of persons, specified in that notification.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Examine the TDS implications under section 194A in the cases mentioned
hereunder–
(i) On 1.10.2024, Mr. Harish made a six-month fixed deposit of ` 10 lakh@9%
p.a. with ABC Co-operative Bank. The fixed deposit matures on 31.3.2025.
(ii) On 1.6.2024, Mr. Ganesh made three nine months fixed deposits of ` 3 lakh
each, carrying interest@9% p.a. with Dwarka Branch, Janakpuri Branch and
Rohini Branch of XYZ Bank, a bank which has adopted CBS. The fixed deposits
mature on 28.2.2025.
(iii) On 1.10.2024, Mr. Rajesh started a six months recurring deposit of
` 2,00,000 per month@8% p.a. with PQR Bank. The recurring deposit matures
on 31.3.2025.
SOLUTION
(i) ABC Co-operative Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% on the interest of
` 45,000 (9% × ` 10 lakh × ½) under section 194A. The tax deductible at
source under section 194A from such interest is, therefore, ` 4,500.
(ii) XYZ Bank has to deduct tax at source@10% u/s 194A, since the aggregate
interest on fixed deposit with the three branches of the bank is ` 60,750
[3,00,000 × 3 × 9% × 9/12], which exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000.
Since XYZ Bank has adopted CBS, the aggregate interest credited/paid by all
branches has to be considered. Since the aggregate interest of ` 60,750
exceeds the threshold limit of ` 40,000, tax has to be deducted@10%
u/s 194A.
(iii) No tax has to be deducted under section 194A by PQR Bank on the interest
of ` 28,000 falling due on recurring deposit on 31.3.2025 to Mr. Rajesh,
since such interest does not exceed the threshold limit of ` 40,000.
3.4 Winnings from online games [Section 194BA]
(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194BA
Any person responsible for paying to any person any income by way of
winnings from online games during the financial year is required to deduct
tax @30% on the net winnings in a person’s user account as computed in
prescribed manner, at the end of the F.Y.
(2) TDS on withdrawal during the financial year
In case there is withdrawal from user account during the F.Y., tax would be
deducted at the time of such withdrawal on net winnings comprised in such
withdrawal. In addition, tax would also be deducted on the remaining
amount of net winnings in the user account as computed in prescribed
manner at the end of the F.Y.
(3) Net winnings wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in kind
Where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash and partly in
kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of deduction
of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings, the person responsible for
paying shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure that tax has been paid in
respect of the net winnings.
(4) Meaning of certain terms
S.No. Term Meaning
(i) Online gaming An intermediary that offers one or more online
intermediary games.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 9
a
(ii) User Any person who accesses or avails any computer
resource of an online gaming intermediary.
(iii) User account Account of a user registered with an online
gaming intermediary.
(5) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines
In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
section, the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines, with the approval of
the Central Government, for the purpose of removing the difficulty.
Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on the
person liable to collect tax.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide circular No. 5/2023 dated 22.5.2023, issued
the following guidelines:
Question 1: There are a large number of gamers who play with very
insignificant amount and withdraw also very small amount. Deducting tax at
source under section 194BA for each insignificant withdrawal would increase
compliance for tax deductor. Can there be relaxation to ease compliance?
Answer: Tax may not be deducted on withdrawal on satisfaction of all of the
following conditions, namely:-
(i) net winnings comprised in the amount withdrawn does not exceed
` 100 in a month;
(ii) tax not deducted on account of this concession is deducted at a time
when the net winnings comprised in withdrawal exceeds ` 100 in the
same month or subsequent month or if there is no such withdrawal, at
the end of the financial year; and
(iii) the deductor undertakes responsibility of paying the difference if the
balance in the user account at the time of tax deduction under section
194BA is not sufficient to discharge the tax deduction liability.
Question 2: When the net winnings is in kind how will tax deduction under
section 194BA operate?
Answer: At the outset, it may be clarified that where money in user account
is used to buy an item in kind and given to user then it is net winnings in cash
only and the deductor is required to deduct tax at source under section 194BA
accordingly.
However, there could be a situation where the winning of the game is a prize
in kind. In that situation provision of section 194BA(2) will operate.
According to this where the net winnings are wholly in kind or partly in cash,
and partly in kind but the part in cash is not sufficient to meet the liability of
deduction of tax in respect of whole of the net winnings. In these situations,
the person responsible for paying, shall, before releasing the winnings, ensure
that tax has been paid in respect of the net winnings. In the above situation,
the deductor will release the net winnings in kind after the deductee provides
proof of payment of such tax (e.g., Challan details etc.).
In the alternative, as an option to remove difficulty if any, the deductor may
deduct the tax under section 194BA and pay to the Government.
Question 3: How will the valuation of winnings in kind required to be carried
out?
Answer: The valuation would be based on fair market value of the winnings
in kind except in following cases:-
(i) The online game intermediary has purchased the winnings before
providing it to the user. In that case the purchase price shall be the
value for winnings.
(ii) The online game intermediary manufactures such items given as
winnings. In that case, the price that it charges to its customers for such
items shall be the value for such winnings.
It is further clarified that GST will not be included for the purposes of
valuation of winnings for TDS under section 194BA.
3.5 Payments to contractors and sub-contractors
[Section 194C]
(1) Applicability of TDS under section 194C
Section 194C provides for deduction of tax at source from the payment
made to resident contractors and sub-contractors.
Tax has to be deducted at source under section 194C by any person
responsible for paying any sum to a resident contractor for carrying out any
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.2 1
a
work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in pursuance of
a contract between the contractor and the –
(i) the Central Government or any State Government; or
(ii) any local authority; or
(iii) any statutory corporation; or
(iv) any company; or
(v) any co-operative society; or
(vi) any statutory authority dealing with housing accommodation or for
the purpose of planning, development or improvement of cities, towns
and villages or for both; or
(vii) any society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860; or
(viii) any trust; or
(ix) any university established or incorporated by or under a Central, State
or Provincial Act and an institution declared to be a university under
the UGC Act, 1956; or
(x) any firm; or
(xi) any Government of a foreign State or foreign enterprise or any
association or body established outside India; or
(xii) any person, being an individual, HUF, AOP or BOI, who has total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceeding ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case
of profession during the financial year immediately preceding the
financial year in which such sum is credited or paid to the account of
the contractor.
(2) Time of deduction
Tax has to be deducted at the time of payment of such sum or at the time
of credit of such sum to the account of the contractor, whichever is earlier.
Where any such sum is credited to any account in the books of account of
the person liable to pay such income, such crediting is deemed to be credit
of such income to the account of the payee and the tax has to be deducted
at source. The account to which such sum is credited may be called
“Suspense account” or by any other name.
However, no tax has to be deducted at source in respect of payments made
by individuals/HUF to a contractor exclusively for personal purposes.
(3) Rate of TDS
The rate of TDS under section 194C on payments to contractors would be
1%, where the payee is an individual or HUF and 2% in respect of other
payees. The same rates of TDS would apply for both contractors and sub-
contractors.
The applicable rates of TDS under section 194C are as follows –
Payee TDS rate
Individual HUF contractor/sub-contractor 1%
Other than individual/HUF contractor/ sub-contractor 2%
Contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished) Nil
Sub-contractor in transport business (if PAN is furnished) Nil
(4) Threshold limit for deduction of tax at source under section 194C
No deduction will be required to be made if the consideration for the
contract does not exceed ` 30,000. However, to prevent the practice of
composite contracts being split up into contracts valued at less than
` 30,000 to avoid tax deduction, it has been provided that tax will be
required to be deducted at source where the amount credited or paid or
likely to be credited or paid to a contractor or sub-contractor exceeds
` 30,000 in a single payment or ` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during a
financial year.
Therefore, even if a single payment to a contractor does not exceed
` 30,000, TDS provisions under section 194C would be attracted where the
aggregate of the amounts of such sums credited or paid or likely to be
credited or paid to the contractor during the financial year exceeds
` 1,00,000.
ILLUSTRATION 3
ABC Ltd. makes the following payments to Mr. X, a contractor, for contract
work during the P.Y.2024-25–
` 20,000 on 1.5.2024
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.2 3
a
` 25,000 on 1.8.2024
` 28,000 on 1.12.2024
On 1.3.2025, a payment of ` 30,000 is due to Mr. X on account of a contract work.
Discuss whether ABC Ltd. is liable to deduct tax at source under section 194C
from payments made to Mr. X.
SOLUTION
In this case, the individual contract payments made to Mr. X does not
exceed ` 30,000. However, since the aggregate amount paid to Mr. X
during the P.Y. 2024-25 exceeds ` 1,00,000 (on account of the last payment
of ` 30,000, due on 1.3.2025, taking the total from ` 73,000 to ` 1,03,000),
the TDS provisions under section 194C would get attracted. Tax has to be
deducted@1% on the entire amount of ` 1,03,000 from the last payment of
` 30,000 and the balance of ` 28,970 (i.e., ` 30,000 – ` 1,030) has to be paid
to Mr. X.
(5) Definition of work
Work includes –
(a) advertising;
(b) broadcasting and telecasting including production of programmes for
such broadcasting or telecasting;
(c) carriage of goods or passengers by any mode of transport other than
by railways;
(d) catering;
(e) manufacturing or supplying a product according to the requirement
or specification of a customer by using material purchased from such
customer or its associate, being a person related to the customer in
such manner as defined u/s 40A(2)(b), (i.e., the customer would be in
the place of assessee; and the associate would be the related
person(s) mentioned in that section).
However, “work” shall not include manufacturing or supplying a product
according to the requirement or specification of a customer by using raw
material purchased from a person, other than such customer or associate of
such customer, as such a contract is a contract for ‘sale’. However, this will
not be applicable to a contract which does not entail manufacture or supply
of an article or thing (e.g. a construction contract).
It may be noted that the term “work” would include manufacturing or
supplying a product according to the requirement or specification of a
customer by using material purchased from such customer or its associate.
In such a case, tax shall be deducted on the invoice value excluding the
value of material purchased from such customer or its associate, if such
value is mentioned separately in the invoice. Where the material component
has not been separately mentioned in the invoice, tax shall be deducted on
the whole of the invoice value.
Further, w.e.f. 1.10.2024, it is clarified that “work” shall also not include any
sum referred to in section 194J(1).
(6) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194C
No deduction is required to be made from the sum credited or paid or likely
to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a
contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing
goods carriages, if he furnishes his PAN to the deductor.
In order to convey the true intent of law, it has been clarified that this
relaxation from the requirement to deduct tax at source shall only be
applicable to the payment in the nature of transport charges (whether paid
by a person engaged in the business of transport or otherwise) made to a
contractor, who fulfills the following three conditions cumulatively -
is engaged in the
business of plying,
hiring or leasing goods
owns ten or less
carriages
goods carriages
has furnished a
at any time
declaration to this
during the
effect along with his
previous year
PAN
Exemption
u/s 194C(6)
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.2 5
a
Meaning of Goods carriage:
Goods carriage means -
(i) any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the
carriage of goods; or
(ii) any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted, when used for the
carriage of goods.
The term “motor vehicle” does not include vehicles having less than
four wheels and with engine capacity not exceeding 25cc as well as
vehicles running on rails or vehicles adapted for use in a factory or in
enclosed premises.
(7) Important points
(i) The deduction of income-tax will be made from sums paid for carrying
out any work or for supplying labour for carrying out any work. In
other words, the section will apply only in relation to ‘works contracts’
and ‘labour contracts’ and will not cover contracts for sale of goods.
(ii) Contracts for rendering professional services by lawyers, physicians,
surgeons, engineers, accountants, architects, consultants etc., cannot
be regarded as contracts for carrying out any “work” and, accordingly,
no deduction of income-tax is to be made from payments relating to
such contracts under this section. Separate provisions for fees for
professional services have been made under section 194J.
(iii) The deduction of income-tax must be made at the time of credit of the sum
to the account of the contractor, or at the time of payment thereof in cash
or by issue of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
ILLUSTRATION 4
Certain concessions are granted to transport operators in the context of cash
payments u/s 40A(3) and deduction of tax at source u/s 194-C. Elucidate.
SOLUTION
Section 40A(3) provides for disallowance of expenditure incurred in respect of
which payment or aggregate of payments made to a person in a day exceeds
` 10,000, and such payment or payments are made otherwise than by account
payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of electronic clearing system
through bank account or through other prescribed electronic modes.
However, in case of payment made to transport operators for plying, hiring or
leasing goods carriages, the disallowance will be attracted only if the payment
made to a person in a day exceeds ` 35,000. Therefore, payment or aggregate of
payments up to ` 35,000 in a day can be made to a transport operator otherwise
than by way of account payee cheque or account payee bank draft or use of
electronic system through bank account or through other prescribed electronic
modes, without attracting disallowance u/s 40A(3).
Under section 194C, tax had to be deducted in respect of payments made to
contractors at the rate of 1%, in case the payment is made to individual or Hindu
Undivided Family or at the rate of 2%, in any other case.
However, no deduction is required to be made from any sum credited or paid or
likely to be credited or paid during the previous year to the account of a
contractor, during the course of the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods
carriages, if the following conditions are fulfilled:-
(1) He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the previous year.
(2) He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriages;
(3) He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.
3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]
(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS
Any person other than an individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying
any income by way of commission (other than insurance commission) or
brokerage to a resident shall deduct income tax @5% till 30.09.2024. With
effect from 01.10.2024, tax has to be deducted @2%.
However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
immediately preceding financial year in which such commission or
brokerage is credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.
(2) Time of deduction
The deduction shall be made at the time such income is credited to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment in cash or by issue of
cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.2 7
a
Even where income is credited to some other account, whether called
“Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the
person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
credit to the account of the payee for the purposes of this section.
(3) Threshold limit
No deduction is required if the amount of such income or the aggregate of
such amount does not exceed ` 15,000 during the financial year.
(4) Meaning of “Commission or brokerage”
“Commission or brokerage” includes any payment received or receivable,
directly or indirectly, by a person acting on behalf of another person
- for services rendered, or
- for any services in the course of buying or selling of goods, or
- in relation to any transaction relating to any asset, valuable article or
thing, other than securities.
(5) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194H
(i) This section is not applicable to professional services. “Professional
Services” means services rendered by a person in the course of
carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or
the profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior
decoration or such other profession as notified by the CBDT for the
purpose of compulsory maintenance of books of account under
section 44AA.
(ii) Further, there would be no requirement to deduct tax at source on
commission or brokerage payments by BSNL or MTNL to their public
call office (PCO) franchisees.
(6) Applicability of TDS provisions on payments by television channels and
publishing houses to advertisement companies for procuring or
canvassing for advertisements [Circular No. 05/2016, dated 29-2-2016]
There are two types of payments involved in the advertising business:
(i) Payment by client to the advertising agency, and
(ii) Payment by advertising agency to the television channel/newspaper
company
The applicability of TDS on these payments has already been dealt with in
Circular No. 715 dated 8-8-1995, where it has been clarified in Question
Nos. 1 & 2 that while TDS under section 194C (as work contract) will be
applicable on the first type of payment, there will be no TDS under section
194C on the second type of payment e.g. payment by advertising agency to
the media company.
However, another issue has been raised in various cases as to whether the
fees/charges taken or retained by advertising companies from media
companies for canvasing/booking advertisements (typically 15% of the
billing) is ‘commission’ or ‘discount’ for attracting the provisions of
section 194H.
The CBDT has clarified that no TDS is attracted on payments made by television
channels/newspaper companies to the advertising agency for booking or
procuring of or canvassing for advertisements. It is also further clarified that
‘commission’ referred to in Question No.27 of the CBDT’s Circular No. 715
dated 8-8-1995 does not refer to payments by media companies to advertising
companies for booking of advertisements but to payments for engagement of
models, artists, photographers, sportspersons, etc. and, therefore, is not
relevant to the issue of TDS referred to in this Circular.
ILLUSTRATION 5
Moon TV, a television channel, made payment of ` 50 lakhs to a production house
for production of programme for telecasting as per the specifications given by the
channel. The copyright of the programme is also transferred to Moon TV. Would
such payment be liable for tax deduction at source under section 194C? Discuss.
Also, examine whether the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C
would be attracted if the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of
telecasting rights of the content already produced by the production house.
SOLUTION
In this case, since the programme is produced by the production house as per the
specifications given by Moon TV, a television channel, and the copyright is also
transferred to the television channel, the same falls within the scope of definition
of the term ‘work’ under section 194C. Therefore, the payment of ` 50 lakhs made
by Moon TV to the production house would be subject to tax deduction at source
under section 194C.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.2 9
a
If, however, the payment was made by Moon TV for acquisition of telecasting
rights of the content already produced by the production house, there is no
contract for ‘’carrying out any work”, as required in section 194C(1). Therefore,
such payment would not be liable for tax deduction at source under
section 194C.
3.7 Rent [Section 194-I]
(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS
Any person other than individual or HUF, who is responsible for paying to a
resident any income by way of rent, is liable to deduct tax at source.
However, an individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
from the business or profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year
immediately preceding financial year in which such rent was credited or
paid, is liable to deduct tax at source.
(2) Rate of TDS
Tax has to be deducted at the rate of:
(i) 2% in respect of rent for plant, machinery or equipment;
(ii) 10% in respect of other rental payments (i.e., rent for use of any land
or building, including factory building, or land appurtenant to a
building, including factory building, or furniture or fittings).
(3) Time of deduction
This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such income to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
of cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where any such income is credited to any account, whether called
“Suspense account” or by any other name, in the books of account of the
person liable to pay such income, such crediting shall be deemed to be
credit of such income to the account of the payee and the provisions of this
section will apply accordingly.
(4) Threshold limit
No deduction shall be made where the amount of such income or the
aggregate of the amounts of such income credited or paid or likely to be
credited or paid during the financial year to the account of the payee does
not exceed ` 2,40,000.
(5) Meaning of Rent
“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either
separately or together) any –
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant; or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
(h) fittings,
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.
(6) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to payments made
by the customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage
owners
CBDT Circular No.1/2008 dated 10.1.2008 provides clarification regarding
applicability of provisions of section 194-I to payments made by the
customers on account of cooling charges to the cold storage owners.
The main function of the cold storage is to preserve perishable goods by
means of a mechanical process, and storage of such goods is only incidental
in nature. The customer is also not given any right to use any demarcated
space/place or the machinery of the cold store and thus does not become a
tenant. Therefore, the provisions of 194-I are not applicable to the cooling
charges paid by the customers of the cold storage.
However, since the arrangement between the customers and cold storage
owners are basically contractual in nature, the provision of section 194-C
will be applicable to the amounts paid as cooling charges by the customers
of the cold storage.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.3 1
a
(7) No requirement to deduct tax at source under section 194-I on
remittance of Passenger Service Fees (PSF) by an Airline to an Airport
Operator [Circular No. 21/2017, dated 12.06.2017]
The primary requirement of any payment to qualify as rent is that the
payment must be for the use of land and building and mere
incidental/minor/ insignificant use of the same while providing other
facilities and service would not make it a payment for use of land and
buildings so as to attract section 194-I.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that the provisions of
section 194-I shall not be applicable on payment of PSF by an airline to
Airport Operator.
(8) Applicability of TDS provisions under section 194-I to service tax
component of rental income
CBDT Circular No.4/2008 dated 28.4.2008 provides clarification on
deduction of tax at source (TDS) on service tax component of rental income
under section 194-I.
As per the provisions of 194-I, tax is deductible at source on income by way
of rent paid to any resident. Further, rent has been defined in 194-I to mean
any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-lease, tenancy
or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of (either separately or
together) any,-
(a) land; or
(b) building (including factory building); or
(c) land appurtenant to a building (including factory building); or
(d) machinery; or
(e) plant; or
(f) equipment; or
(g) furniture; or
(h) fittings,
whether or not any or all of the above are owned by the payee.
Service tax paid by the tenant doesn’t partake the nature of income of the
landlord. The landlord only acts as a collecting agency for Government for
collection of service tax. Therefore, tax deduction at source under section
194-I would be required to be made on the amount of rent paid/payable
without including the service tax.
Note - It is possible to take a view that the clarification given in Circular
No.4/2008 would apply in the GST regime also.
Clarification regarding TDS on Goods and Services Tax (GST)
component comprised in payments made to residents
[Circular No. 23/2017 dated 19.07.2017]
The CBDT has, vide this circular, clarified that wherever in terms of the
agreement or contract between the payer and the payee, the component of
‘GST on services’ comprised in the amount payable to a resident is indicated
separately, tax shall be deducted at source on the amount paid or payable
without including such ‘GST on services’ component.
GST shall include Integrated Goods and Services Tax, Central Goods and
Services Tax, State Goods and Services Tax and Union Territory Goods and
Services Tax.
Further, for the purposes of this Circular, any reference to “service tax” in an
existing agreement or contract which was entered into prior to 01.07.2017
shall be treated as “GST on services” with respect to the period from
01.07.2017 onward till the expiry of such agreement or contract.
(9) Clarification on applicability of TDS provisions of section 194-I on
lumpsum lease premium paid for acquisition of long term lease
[Circular No.35/2016, dated 13-10-2016]
The issue of whether or not TDS under section 194-I is applicable on ‘lump
sum lease premium’ or ‘one-time upfront lease charges” paid by an
assessee for acquiring long-term leasehold rights for land or any other
property has been examined by the CBDT.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide this Circular, clarified that lump sum lease
premium or one-time upfront lease charges, which are not adjustable
against periodic rent, paid or payable for acquisition of long-term leasehold
rights over land or any other property are not payments in the nature of
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.3 3
a
rent within the meaning of section 194-I. Therefore, such payments are not
liable for TDS under section 194-I.
ILLUSTRATION 6
XYZ Ltd. pays ` 50,000 per month as rent to the Mr. Kishore for a building in which
one of its branches is situated. Discuss whether TDS provisions under section 194-I
are attracted.
SOLUTION
Section 194-I, which governs the deduction of tax at source on payment of rent,
exceeding ` 2,40,000 p.a., is applicable to all taxable entities except individuals
and HUFs, whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or
profession carried on by him does not exceed ` 1 crore in case of business and
` 50 lakhs in case of profession during the financial year immediately preceding
financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, is liable to deduct tax at
source.
Since the rent paid by XYZ Ltd. to Mr. Kishore exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions
of section 194-I for deduction of tax at source attracted.
The rate applicable for deduction at source under section 194-I on rent paid is
10%, assuming that Mr. Kishore had furnished his PAN to XYZ Ltd.
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source
= ` 6,00,000 x 10% = ` 60,000
3.8 Payment of rent by certain individuals or Hindu
undivided family [Section 194-IB]
(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS
Section 194-IB requires any person, being individual or HUF, other than
those individual or HUF whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover from
the business or profession exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50
lakhs in case of profession in the financial year immediately preceding the
financial year in which such rent was credited or paid, responsible for paying
to a resident any income by way of rent, to deduct income tax @5% till
30.09.2024. With effect from 01.10.2024, tax has to be deducted @2%.
(2) Threshold limit
Under this section, tax has to be deducted at source only if the amount of
such rent exceeds ` 50,000 for a month or part of a month during the
previous year.
(3) Time of deduction
This deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such rent, for the last
month of the previous year or the last month of tenancy, if the property is
vacated during the year, as the case may be, to the account of the payee or
at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue of cheque or draft or by
any other mode, whichever is earlier.
(4) No requirement to obtain TAN
The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax
deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to
deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194-IB.
(5) Meaning of “Rent”
“Rent” means any payment, by whatever name called, under any lease, sub-
lease, tenancy or any other agreement or arrangement for the use of any
land or building or both.
(6) Deduction not to exceed rent for last month
Where the tax is required to be deducted as per the provisions of section
206AA, such deduction shall not exceed the amount of rent payable for the
last month of the previous year or the last month of the tenancy, as the case
may be [Section 206AA providing for deduction of tax at source at a higher
rate is discussed at length later on in this chapter]
ILLUSTRATION 7
Mr. X, a salaried individual, pays rent of ` 55,000 per month to Mr. Y from June,
2024. Is he required to deduct tax at source? If so, when is he required to deduct
tax? Also, compute the amount of tax to be deducted at source.
Would your answer change if Mr. X vacated the premises on 31st December, 2024?
Also, what would be your answer if Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X?
SOLUTION
Since Mr. X pays rent exceeding ` 50,000 per month in the F.Y. 2024-25, he is
liable to deduct tax at source @5% till 30.09.2024 and thereafter @2%. The tax is
to be deducted in the last month of the P.Y. 2024-25 i.e., March 2025 or in the
last month of tenancy, if the property is vacated during the year,. Since
property is not vacated during the year, ` 11,000 [(` 55,000 x 2% x 10)] has to be
deducted from rent payable for March, 2025.
If Mr. X vacated the premises in December, 2024, then tax of ` 7,700 [(` 55,000 x
2% x 7)] has to be deducted from rent payable for December, 2024.
In case Mr. Y does not provide his PAN to Mr. X, tax would be deductible@20%,
instead of 2%.
In case 1 above, this would amount to ` 1,10,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 10], but the
same has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for March, 2025.
In case 2 above, this would amount to ` 77,000 [` 55,000 x 20% x 7], but the same
has to be restricted to ` 55,000, being rent for December, 2024.
3.9 Fees for professional or technical services [Section 194J]
(1) Applicability and Rate of TDS
Every person other than an individual or a HUF, who is responsible for
paying to a resident any sum by way of –
(i) fees for professional services; or
(ii) fees for technical services; or
(iii) any remuneration or fees or commission, by whatever name called,
other than those on which tax is deductible under section 192, to a
director of a company; or
(iv) royalty, or
(v) non-compete fees referred to in section 28(va)
shall deduct tax at source at the rate of –
(a) 2% in case of fees for technical services (not being professional
services) or royalty in the nature of consideration for sale, distribution
or exhibition of cinematographic films; and
(b) 10% in other cases.
However, in case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of
call centre, the tax shall be deducted at source @2%
(2) Time of deduction
The deduction is to be made at the time of credit of such sum to the
account of the payee or at the time of payment thereof in cash or by issue
of a cheque or draft or by any other mode, whichever is earlier.
Where such sum is credited to any account, whether called suspense
account or by any other name, in the books of accounts of the person liable
to pay such sum, such crediting shall be deemed to be credit of such sum to
the account of the payee and tax has to be deducted accordingly.
(3) Threshold limit
No tax deduction is required if the amount of fees or the aggregate of the
amounts of fees credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during a
financial year does not exceed ` 30,000 in the case of fees for professional
services, ` 30,000 in the case of fees for technical services, ` 30,000 in the
case of royalty and ` 30,000 in the case of non-compete fees.
The limit of ` 30,000 under section 194J is applicable separately for fees for
professional services, fees for technical services, royalty and non-compete
fees referred to in section 28(va). It implies that if the payment to a person
towards each of the above is less than ` 30,000, no tax is required to be
deducted at source, even though the aggregate payment or credit exceeds
` 30,000. However, there is no such exemption limit for deduction of tax on
any remuneration or fees or commission payable to director of a company.
Summary of rates and threshold limit under section 194J for deduction
of tax at source
Separate
Nature of payment TDS rate
Limit
Fees for technical services (not being 2% ` 30,000
professional services)
Fees for professional services 10% ` 30,000
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.3 7
a
Royalty in the nature of consideration for 2%
sale, distribution or exhibition of
` 30,000
cinematographic films
Other royalty 10%
Any remuneration or fees or commission, 10% Nil
by whatever name called, other than those
on which tax is deductible under section
192, to a director of a company
Non-compete fees 10% ` 30,000
In case of a payee, engaged only in the business of operation of call centre,
the tax shall be deducted at source @2%
ILLUSTRATION 8
XYZ Ltd. makes a payment of ` 28,000 to Mr. Ganesh on 2.8.2024 towards
fees for professional services and another payment of ` 25,000 to him on the
same date towards fees for technical services. Discuss whether TDS provisions
under section 194J are attracted.
SOLUTION
TDS provisions under section 194J would not get attracted, since the limit of
` 30,000 is applicable for fees for professional services and fees for technical
services, separately. It is assumed that there is no other payment to
Mr. Ganesh towards fees for professional services and fees for technical
services during the P.Y.2024-25.
(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194J
(i) An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at
source.
However, an individual or HUF, whose total sales, gross receipts or
turnover from business or profession carried by him exceeds ` 1 crore
in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of profession in the financial
year immediately preceding the financial year in which the fees for
professional services or fees for technical services is credited or
paid is required to deduct tax on such fees.
Since this provision requires such individuals/HUFs to
deduct tax at source only in respect of fees for professional
services or fees for technical services, it can be inferred that
individuals and HUFs are not required to deduct tax at source under
section 194J on royalty and non-compete fees.
(ii) Further, an individual or Hindu Undivided Family, shall not be liable to
deduct income-tax on the sum payable by way of fees for professional
services, in case such sum is credited or paid exclusively for personal
purposes.
(5) Meaning of “Professional services”
“Professional services” means services rendered by a person in the course of
carrying on legal, medical, engineering or architectural profession or the
profession of accountancy or technical consultancy or interior decoration or
advertising or such other profession as is notified by the CBDT for the
purposes of section 44AA or of this section.
Other professions notified for the purposes of section 44AA are as follows:
(a) Profession of “authorised representatives”;
(b) Profession of “film artist”;
(c) Profession of “company secretary”;
(d) Profession of “information technology”.
The CBDT has notified the services rendered by following persons in relation
to the sports activities as Professional Services for the purpose of the
section 194J:
(a) Sports Persons,
(b) Umpires and Referees,
(c) Coaches and Trainers,
(d) Team Physicians and Physiotherapists,
(e) Event Managers,
(f) Commentators,
(g) Anchors and
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.3 9
a
(h) Sports Columnists.
Accordingly, the requirement of TDS as per section 194J would apply to all
the aforesaid professions. The term “profession”, as such, is of a very wide
import. However, the term has been defined in this section exhaustively. For
the purposes of TDS, therefore, all other professions would be outside the
scope of section 194J. For example, this section will not apply to professions
of teaching, sculpture, painting etc. unless they are notified.
(6) Meaning of “Fees for technical services”
The term ‘fees for technical services’ means any consideration (including any
lump sum consideration) for rendering of any of the following services:
(i) Managerial services;
(ii) Technical services;
(iii) Consultancy services;
(iv) Provision of services of technical or other personnel.
It is expressly provided that the term ‘fees for technical services’ will not
include following types of consideration:
(i) Consideration for any construction, assembly, mining or like project,
or
(ii) Consideration which is chargeable under the head ‘Salaries’.
(7) TPAs liable to deduct tax under section 194J on payment to hospitals
on behalf of insurance companies
The CBDT has, through Circular No.8/2009 dated 24.11.2009, clarified that
TPAs (Third Party Administrator’s) who are making payment on behalf of
insurance companies to hospitals for settlement of medical/insurance claims
etc. under various schemes including cashless schemes are liable to deduct
tax at source under section 194J on all such payments to hospitals etc. This
is because the services rendered by hospitals to various patients are
primarily medical services and, therefore, the provisions of section 194J are
applicable to payments made by TPAs to hospitals etc.
(8) Consideration for use or right to use of computer software is royalty
within the meaning of section 9(1)(vi)
As per section 9(1)(vi), any income payable by way of royalty in respect of
any right, property or information is deemed to accrue or arise in India. The
term “royalty” means consideration for transfer of all or any right in respect
of certain rights, property or information.
As per Explanation 4 to section 9(1)(vi), the consideration for use or right to
use of computer software would be royalty. This Explanation clarifies that
transfer of all or any rights in respect of any right, property or information
includes and has always included transfer of all or any right for use or right
to use a computer software (including granting of a licence) irrespective of
the medium through which such right is transferred.
Consequently, the provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194J
would be attracted in respect of consideration for use or right to use
computer software since the same falls within the definition of royalty as
per the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
The Central Government has, vide Notification No.21/2012 dated
13.6.2012, effective from 1st July, 2012, exempted certain software
payments from the applicability of tax deduction under section
194J. Accordingly, where payment is made by the transferee for acquisition of
software from a resident-transferor, the provisions of section 194J would not
be attracted if-
(1) the software is acquired in a subsequent transfer without any
modification by the transferor;
(2) tax has been deducted under section 194J on payment for any
previous transfer of such software; and
(3) the transferee obtains a declaration from the transferor that tax has
been so deducted along with the PAN of the transferor.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.4 1
a
3.10 Payment made by an individual or a HUF for contract
work or by way of commission or brokerage or fees for
professional services [Section 194M]
(1) Applicability and rate of TDS
Section 194M provides for deduction of tax at source @5%* by an
individual or a HUF responsible for paying any sum during the financial year
to any resident –
(i) for carrying out any work (including supply of labour for carrying out
any work) in pursuance of a contract; or
(ii) by way of commission (not being insurance commission referred to in
section 194D) or brokerage; or
(iii) by way of fees for professional services.
It may be noted that only individuals and HUFs (other than those who are
required to deduct income-tax as per the provisions of section 194C or
194H or 194J) are required to deduct tax in respect of the above sums
payable during the financial year to a resident.
*Rate of tax has been reduced to 2% with effect from 01.10.2024.
(2) Time of deduction
The tax should be deducted at the time of credit of such sum or at the time
of payment of such sum, whichever is earlier.
(3) Threshold limit
No tax is required to be deducted where such sum or, as the case may be,
aggregate amount of such sums credited or paid to a resident during the
financial year does not exceed ` 50,00,000
(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194M
An individual or a Hindu undivided family is not liable to deduct tax at
source u/s 194M if –
(i) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194C for carrying out any
work (including supply of labour for carrying out any work) in
pursuance of a contract i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such
amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of
such individual or HUF.
(ii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194H on commission
(not being insurance commission referred to in section 194D) or
brokerage i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales, gross receipts
or turnover from the business or profession carried on by him exceeds
` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession
during the immediately preceding financial year.
(iii) they are required to deduct tax at source u/s 194J on fees for
professional services i.e., an individual or a HUF whose total sales,
gross receipts or turnover from the business or profession carried on
by him exceeds ` 1 crore in case of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of
profession during the immediately preceding financial year and such
amount is not exclusively credited or paid for personal purposes of
such individual or HUF.
(5) No requirement to obtain TAN
The provisions of section 203A containing the requirement of obtaining Tax
deduction account number (TAN) shall not apply to the person required to
deduct tax in accordance with the provisions of section 194M.
Note - For the meaning of the terms “Work”, “Professional services” and
“Commission or brokerage” refer sub-heading “3.5 Payments to contractors and
sub-contractors [Section 194C]”, “3.9 Fees for professional or technical services
[Section 194J]” and “3.6 Commission or brokerage [Section 194H]”, respectively.
ILLUSTRATION 9
Examine whether TDS provisions would be attracted in the following cases, and if
so, under which section. Also specify the rate of TDS applicable in each case.
Assume that all payments are made to residents.
Particulars of the Nature of payment Aggregate of
payer payments made in
the F.Y.2024-25
1. Mr. Ganesh, an Contract Payment for ` 5 lakhs
individual carrying repair of residential house
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.4 3
a
on retail business
Payment of commission to ` 80,000 in
with turnover of ` 2.5
Mr. Vallish for business November 2024
crores in the
purposes
P.Y.2023-24
2. Mr. Rajesh, a Contract Payment for ` 20 lakhs in
wholesale trader reconstruction of January, 2025,
whose turnover was residential house (made ` 15 lakhs in Feb
` 95 lakhs in P.Y. during the period January- 2025 and ` 20 lakhs
2023-24. March, 2025) in March 2025.
3. Mr. Satish, a salaried Payment of brokerage for ` 51 lakhs
individual buying a residential house
in March, 2025
4. Mr. Dheeraj, a Contract payment made ` 48 lakhs
pensioner during October-November
2024 for reconstruction of
residential house
SOLUTION
Particulars Nature of Aggregate Whether TDS
of the payer payment of payments provisions are
in the attracted?
F.Y.2024-25
1. Mr. Ganesh, Contract ` 5 lakhs No; TDS under section
an individual Payment for 194C is not attracted
carrying on repair of since the payment is for
retail residential personal purpose. TDS
business with house under section 194M is
turnover of not attracted as
` 2.5 crores aggregate of contract
in the payment to the payee in
P.Y.2023-24 the P.Y.2024-25 does not
exceed ` 50 lakh.
Payment of ` 80,000 Yes, u/s 194H @2%, since
commission to the payment exceeds
Mr. Vallish for ` 15,000, and Mr. Ganesh’s
business turnover exceeds ` 1 crore
purposes in the P.Y.2023-24.
2. Mr. Rajesh, a Contract ` 55 lakhs Yes, u/s 194M @2%,
wholesale Payment for since the aggregate of
trader whose reconstruction payments (i.e., ` 55
turnover was of residential lakhs) exceed
` 95 lakhs in house ` 50 lakhs. Since, his
P.Y. 2023-24 turnover does not
exceed 1 crore in the
P.Y.2023-24, TDS
provisions under section
194C are not attracted in
respect of payments
made in the
P.Y. 2024-25.
3. Mr. Satish, a Payment of ` 51 lakhs Yes, u/s 194M @2%, since
salaried brokerage for the payment of ` 51 lakhs
individual buying a made in March 2025
residential exceeds the threshold of
house ` 50 lakhs. Since
Mr. Satish is a salaried
individual, the provisions
of section 194H are not
applicable in this case.
4. Mr. Dheeraj, a Contract ` 48 lakhs TDS provisions under
pensioner payment for section 194C are not
reconstruction attracted since
of residential Mr. Dheeraj is a
house pensioner. TDS provisions
under section 194M are
also not applicable in this
case, since the payment
of ` 48 lakhs does not
exceed the threshold of
` 50 lakhs.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.4 5
a
3.11 TDS on cash withdrawal [Section 194N]
(1) Applicability and rate of TDS
Section 194N provides that every person, being
- a banking company to which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 applies
(including any bank or banking institution referred under section 51 of
that Act)
- a co-operative society engaged in carrying on the business of banking or
- a post office
who is responsible for paying any sum, being the amount or aggregate of
amounts, as the case may be, in cash exceeding ` 1 crore during the
previous year, to any person from one or more accounts maintained by
such recipient-person with it, shall deduct tax at source @2% of such sum
However, if the recipient is a co-operative society, tax is required to be
deducted on any sum exceeding ` 3 crore.
(2) Time of deduction
This deduction is to be made at the time of payment of such sum.
(3) Modification in rate of TDS and threshold limit of withdrawal for
recipient who has not furnished return of income for last 3 years
If the recipient has not furnished the returns of income for all the three
assessment years relevant to the three previous years, for which the time
limit to file return of income under section 139(1) has expired, immediately
preceding the previous year in which the payment of the sum is made, “the
sum” shall mean the amount or the aggregate of amounts, as the case
may be, in cash > ` 20 lakhs during the previous year, and the tax shall
be deducted at the rate of -
- 2% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the
case may be, being paid in cash > ` 20 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore (` 3
crore in case the recipient is a co-operative society)
- 5% of the sum, where the amount or aggregate of amounts, as the
case may be, being paid in cash > ` 1 crore (` 3 crore in case the
recipient is a co-operative society).
However, the Central Government is empowered to specify, with the
consultation of RBI, by notification, the recipient in whose case this
provision shall not apply or apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction
of the conditions specified in such notification.
(4) Non-applicability of TDS under section 194N
Liability to deduct tax at source under section 194N shall not be applicable
to any payment made to –
(i) the Government
(ii) any banking company or co-operative society engaged in carrying on
the business of banking or a post-office
(iii) any business correspondent of a banking company or co-operative
society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance
with the RBI guidelines
(iv) any white label ATM operator of a banking company or co-operative
society engaged in carrying on the business of banking, in accordance
with the authorisation issued by the RBI under the Payment and
Settlement Systems Act, 2007
The Central Government may specify, with the consultation of RBI, by
notification, the recipient in whose case section 194N shall not apply or
apply at reduced rate, subject to the satisfaction of the conditions specified
in such notification.
Example
The persons referred to in (i) to (vi) in Column (2) of the table below have always
been filing their returns of income on or before the due date u/s 139(1). The persons
mentioned in (vii) to (x) in Column (2) of the table below have not filed their returns
of income for the last five years. Determine the liability of deduction of tax at
source u/s 194N by the bank/co-operative bank referred to in column (3) of the
table below in each of the following individual cases, assuming that this is the only
withdrawal in the P.Y.2024-25 by the persons referred to in Column (2).
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.4 7
a
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Bank/Co- Date of Amount of
operative withdrawal withdrawal
Person TDS u/s 194N
Bank from (`)
making the (`)
which
withdrawal
money is
withdrawn
(i) Mr. Harishit SBI 1.7.2024 1,10,00,000 ` 10,00,000 x
2% = ` 20,000
(ii) Mr. Pranav SBI 1.8.2024 90,00,000 Nil (since
withdrawals <
` 1 crore)
(iii) ABC Co- SBI 1.9.2024 2,70,00,000 Nil (since
operative withdrawals <
Society ` 3 crore)
(iv) XYZ Co- MNO Co- 1.9.2024 3,10,00,000 ` 10,00,000 x
operative operative 2% = ` 20,000
Society bank
(v) Mr. Vaibhav MNO Co- 1.9.2024 2,10,00,000 ` 1,10,00,000 x
operative 2% = ` 2,20,000
bank
(vi) A Ltd. MNO Co- 1.10.2024 1,05,00,000 ` 5,00,000 x 2%
operative = ` 10,000
bank
(vii) M/s. DEF & MNO Co- 1.2.2025 90,00,000 ` 70,00,000 x
Co., a firm operative 2% = ` 1,40,000
bank
(viii) Mr. Varun BOI 1.2.2025 1,20,00,000 ` 80,00,000 x
2% (+)
` 20,00,000 x
5% = ` 2,60,000
(ix) Mr. Rakesh BOI 1.2.2025 45,00,000 ` 25,00,000 x
2% = ` 50,000
(x) PQR Co- BOI 1.2.2025 3,30,00,000 ` 2,80,00,000 x
operative 2% (+)
Society ` 30,00,000 x
5% = ` 7,10,000
3.12 OTHER TDS PROVISIONS
The other TDS provisions are given below in tabular form -
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
SDT
morf
noitpmexE
emit
eht
tA
no
%01
laudividnI
eht
fo
seetsurT
ro
tnemyaP
erutamerP
A291
tnemyap
fo
erutamerp
)eeyolpmE(
ro
emehcS
FPE
etagergga
lawardhtiw
retfa
lawardhtiW
.1
fo
ecivres
suounitnoc
elbaxat
desirohtua
yna
≥
tnemyap
morf
sraey
.lawardhtiw
rednu
nosrep
000,05
`
’seeyolpmE
emehcS
eht
tnedivorP
fo
esac
nI
.2
dnuF
erofeb
lawardhtiw
fo
ecivres
suounitnoc – dna
sraey
rof
stpo
eeyolpme
)a(
fo
refsnart
94.9
ecnalab
detalumucca
reyolpme
wen
eht
ot
ot
eud
si
noitanimret
)b(
noitcartnoc
,htlaeh
lli
fo
ecnaunitnocsid
ro
fo
noitassec
,ssenisub
.cte
tnemyolpme
SDT
morf
noitpmexE
erofeB
%01
tnediseR
lapicnirP
ehT
ro
tnuomA
dnediviD
-
ot
diap
ro
detiderc
dnediviD
yna
gnikam
redloherahs
a
fo
reciffO
etagergga
gnidulcni(
tnemyap
citsemod
tnuoma
no
sdnedivid
seiraidisbus
,CIG
,CIL
)a(
yna
yb
ynapmoc
a
ni
000,5
`
>
ecnereferp
rehto
yna
ro
CIG
fo
ni
edom
esac
ni
,.Y.F
)serahs
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.4 9
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
eht
dedivorp
rerusni
fo
tcepser
dnedivid
fo
dnediviD
yb
denwo
era
serahs
yna
ro
diap
sedulcni
evah
yeht
ro
,meht
ro
dnedivid
ot
detiderc
sdnedivid
tseretni
laicifeneb
lluf
erofeb
laudividni
na
noitces
rednu
serahs
hcus
ni
yna
gnikam
redloherahs
ot
)a()22(2
sa
nosrep
rehto
yna
)b(
noitubirtsid
edom
yna
yb
.)f()22(2
yb
deifiton
eb
yam
tnemyap
ro
naht
rehto
lartneC
eht
fo
hsac
.tnemnrevoG
.dnedivid
oN
>
ni
dlohserht
sesac
rehto
sgninniw
eht
erehW
)a(
emit
eht
tA
%03
nosreP
ynA
nosrep
ehT
ro
tnuomA
morf
sgninniW
B491
ro
dnik
ni
yllohw
era
fo
rof
elbisnopser
eht
,yrettol
yna
dna
hsac
ni
yltrap
.tnemyap
emocni
gniyap
fo
etagergga
drowssorc
eht
tub
dnik
ni
yltrap
hcus
fo
yaw
yb
>
stnuoma
drac
ro
elzzup
ton
si
hsac
ni
trap
sgninniw
a
ni
000,01
`
rehto
ro
emag
eht
teem
ot
tneiciffus
.Y.F
yna
fo
emag
fo
noitcuded
fo
ytilibail
morf
ro
tros
elohw
fo
tcepser
ni
xat
ro
gnilbmag
eht
,sgninniw
eht
fo
yna
fo gnitteb
rof
elbisnopser
nosrep
erutan
ro
mrof
erofeb
,llahs
gniyap
naht
rehto(
,sgninniw
eht
gnisaeler
morf
sgninniw
7.50 INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
sah
xat
taht
erusne
enilno
yna
fo
tcepser
ni
diap
neeb
ni
emag
.sgninniw
eht
fo
tcepser
ot
era
sgninniw
erehW
)b(
s/u
SDT
hcihw
sessol
dna
detiderc
eb
dluow
AB491
ot
detibed
eb
ot
era
)elbacilppa
eb
eht
fo
c/a
laudividni
eht
eb
ot
sah
xat
,retnup
sgninniw
no
detcuded
.sessol
fo
ffo-tes
erofeb
ten
eht
,retfaerehT
retfa
,tnuoma
dna
xat
fo
noitcuded
diap
eb
ot
sah
,sessol
.renniw
eht
ot
,sedulcni
’ecar
esroh
ynA‘
emit
eht
tA
%03
nosreP
ynA
a
ro
rekaM
kooB
ro
tnuomA
sgninniW
BB491
eht
reverehw
tnemyap
fo
gnidloh
nosrep
fo
etagergga
esroh
morf
os
secnatsmucric
esroh
rof
ecneci
l
>
stnuoma
ecar
naht
erom
,etatissecen
rof
ro
gnicar
a
ni
000,01
`
.ecar
esroh
eno
rof
gnignarra
.Y.F
ro
gniregaw
yna
ni
gnitteb
.esruoc
ecar
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5 1
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
emit
eht
tA
eht
fi
,%5
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
ecnarusnI
D491
fo
tiderc
fo
si
eeyap
tnediseR
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
noissimmoC
hcus
-non
yna
gniyap
>
tnuoma
ot
emocni
etaroproc
yaw
yb
emocni
a
ni
000,51
`
eht
tnediser
fo
.Y.F
fo
tnuocca
eht
fi
,%01
noitarenumer
eeyap
eht
si
eeyap
rof
drawer
ro
eht
ta
ro
citsemod
ro
gniticilos
fo
emit
ynapmoc
gnirucorp
,tnemyap
ecnarusni
revehcihw
ssenisub
.reilrae
si
eht
gnidulcni( ssenisub
eht
ot
gnitaler
,ecnaunitnoc
ro
lawener
fo
laviver
fo
seicilop
)ecnarusni
SDT
morf
noitpmexE
emit
eht
tA
eht
fo
%5
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
mus
ynA
AD491
a
rednu
deviecer
mus
ehT
tnemyap
fo
fo
tnuoma
tnediser
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
efiL
a
rednu
ycilop
ecnarusni
efil
emocni
mus
yna
gniyap
≥
tnuoma
ecnarusnI
desirpmoc
,PIL
a
rednu
ni
000,00,1
`
ton
yciloP
7.52 INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
eht
sllifluf
hcihw
.niereht
eht
gnidulcni
laicnanif
a
eht
gnillifluf
deificeps
snoitidnoc
.f.e.W
detacolla
mus
raey
snoitidnoc
.)D01(01
noitces
rednu
,4202.01.1
fo
yaw
yb
s/u
deificeps
xat
fo
etar
sunob
)D01(01
.%2
si
si
emocni
erehW
eht
tA
llit
%5
ynA
nosrep
ynA
000,51
`
>
noissimmoC
G491
rehto
emos
ot
detiderc
fo
emit
.4202.90.03
nosrep
rof
elbisnopser
.Y.F
a
ni
fo
elas
no
dellac
rehtehw
,tnuocca
fo
tiderc
retfaerehT
,gnikcots
yna
gniyap
yrettol
ro
”tnuocca
esnepsuS“
hcus
.%2
nitubirtsid
yaw
yb
emocni
stekcit
ni
,eman
rehto
yna
yb
ot
emocni
,g
,noissimmoc
fo
fo
tnuocca
fo
skoob
eht
eht
nisahcrup
noitarenumer
yap
ot
elbail
nosrep
eht
fo
tnuocca
ro
g
yb(
ezirp
ro
hcus
,emocni
hcus
eeyap
eht
gnilles
eman
revetahw
eb
llahs
gnitiderc
eht
ta
ro
yrettol
no
)dellac
ot
tiderc
eb
ot
demeed
fo
emit
stekcit
stekcit
yrettol
eht
fo
tnuocca
eht
,tnemyap
sesoprup
eht
rof
eeyap
revehcihw
.noitces
siht
fo
.reilrae
si
fo
gninaeM
emit
eht
tA
fo
%1
tnediseR
,nosrep
ynA
hkal
`
≥
no
tnemyaP
AI-491
rof
noitaredisnoc
fo
tiderc
fo
noitaredisnoc
rorefsnart
a
gnieb
itaredisnoC(
fo
refsnart
elbavommi
fo
refsnart
mus
hcus
refsnart
rof
eerefsnart
rof
no
niatrec
ytreporp
eht
ot
pmats
ro
a
naht
rehto(
ro
refsnart
elbavommi
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5 3
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
refsnart
rof
noitaredisnoC
fo
tnuocca
,eulav
ytud
derrefer
nosrep
ytud
pmats
rehto
ytreporp
ytreporp
elbavommi
fo
eht
revehcihw
noitces
ni
ot
)eulav
naht
eht
fo
segrahc
lla
edulcni
rorefsnart
.rehgih
si
AL491
larutlucirga
bulc
fo
erutan
eht
ta
ro
oN
rof
elbisnopser
dnal
rac
,eef
pihsrebmem
fo
emit
tnemeriuqer
gniyap
ro
yticirtcele
,eef
gnikrap
,tnemyap
fo
noitasnepmoc
,eef
ytilicaf
retaw
revehcihw
gniniatbo
yroslupmoc
rof
ecnavda
,eef
ecnanetniam
.reilrae
si
s/u
NAT
fo
noitisiuqca
segrahc
rehto
yna
ro
eef
.A302
elbavommi
hcihw
,erutan
ralimis
fo
rehto
ytreporp
refsnart
ot
latnedicni
era
larur
naht
elbavommi
eht
fo
larutlucirga
.ytreporp
)dnal
tceffe
htiw
,deifiralc
si
tI
taht
,4202.01.10
morf
naht
erom
si
ereht
erehw
ro
rorefsnart
eno
fo
tcepser
ni
eerefsnart
,ytreporp
elbavommi
yna
noitaredisnoc
eht
neht
fo
etagergga
eht
eb
llahs
elbayap
ro
diap
tnuoma
ot
seerefsnart
eht
lla
yb
7.54 INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
eht
lla
ro
rorefsnart
eht
refsnart
rof
srorefsnart
elbavommi
hcus
fo
.ytreporp
emit
eht
tA
%01
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
no
emocnI
K491
fo
tiderc
fo
tnediser
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
rehto
stinu
mus
hcus
yna
gniyap
>
tnuoma
eht
ni
naht
eht
ot
ni
emocni
a
ni
000,5
`
fo
erutan
fo
tnuocca
stinu
fo
tcepser
.Y.F
sniag
latipac
eeyap
eht
lautum
a
fo
eht
ta
ro
/dnuf
fo
emit
rotartsinimdA
,tnemyap
deificeps
eht
fo
revehcihw
/gnikatrednu
.reilrae
si
deificeps ynapmoc
ton
era
snoisivorp
SDT
emit
eht
tA
%01
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
noitasnepmoC
AL491
no
elbacilppa
tnemyap
fo
tnediseR
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
noitisiuqca
no
no
noitasnepmoc
mus
yna
gniyap
>
tnuoma
niatrec
fo
larutlucirga
fo
noitisiuqca
fo
erutan
eht
ni
ni
000,05,2
`
elbavommi
rehtehw
,aidnI
ni
dnal
noitasnepmoc
.Y.F
a
ytreporp
.nabru
ro
larur
decnahne
ro
naht
rehto(
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5 5
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
noitasnepmoc
larutlucirga
yroslupmoc
no
detautis
dnal
fo
noitisiuqca
)aidnI
ni
elbavommi
rehto(
ytreporp
naht
larutlucirga
ni
detautis
dnal
)aidnI
nezitic
roines
deificepS
ni
setaR
deificepS
deifitoN
cisaB
noisneP
P491
,laudividni
na
snaem
,ecrof
roines
knab
deificeps
noitpmexe
htiw
gnola(
,aidnI
ni
tnediser
a
gnieb
eht
erehw
nezitic
gniknab
a(
timil
no
tseretni
–
ohw
laudividni
hcihw
ynapmoc
000,00,3
`[
)tnuocca
knab
fo
ega
eht
fo
si
-
sah
deludehcs
a
si
eht
esac
ni(
yna
ta
erom
ro
sraey
desicrexe
sah
dna
knab
deificeps
;.Y.P
eht
gnirud
emit
noitpo
eht
detnioppa
neeb
nezitic
roines
noisnep
gnivah
si
-
gnitfihs
fo
IBR
fo
stnega
sa
xat
syap
rehto
on
dna
emocni
eht
fo
tuo
eht
fo
s/u
eht
rednu
tpecxe
emocni
xat
tluafed
,tcA
IBR
xat
tluafed
emocni
tseretni
.emiger
s/u
emiger
elbaviecer
ro
deviecer
setaR
,)CAB511
tnuocca
yna
morf
ni
deificeps
/
000,00,3
`
noitces
sa
,000,00,5
`
7.56 INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
hcus
yb
deniatniam
,CAB511
yam
esac
eht
emas
eht
ni laudividni
eht
erehw
eht
fi
,eb
ni
knab
deificeps
laudividni
deificeps
gniviecer
si eh
hcihw
xat
syap
nezitic
roines
;emocni
noisnep
sih
eht
rednu
desicrexe
sah
dna
xat
tluafed
fo
noitpo
eht
a
dehsinruf
sah
-
.emiger
tuo
gnitfihs
eht
ot
noitaralced
tluafed
eht
fo
.knab
deificeps
emiger
xat
s/u
gnidivorp
,.e.i[
]CAB511
ot
knab
deificepS
emocni
latot
emocni
latot eht
etupmoc
gnivig
retfa
fo
.Y.A
tnaveler
eht
rof
eht
ot
tceffe
roines
deificeps
eht
noitcuded
sehsinruf
ohw
nezitic
elbawolla
debircserp
ni
noitaralced
rednu
tcuded
dna
,mrof
,A-IV
retpahC
gnivig
retfa
,xat-emocni
yna
fi
rednu
noitcuded
ot
tceffe
elbawolla
yna
fi
,A-IV
retpahC
dluohs
fo
sisab
eht no(
elbawolla
eht
deecxe
eht
yb
dehsinruf
ecnedive
cisab
)nezitic
roines
deificeps
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5 7
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
elbawolla
etaber
dna
noitpmexe
.A78
s/u
,rehtruF
.timil
.oN
noitacifitoN
TDBC[
eht
esac
ni
]1202.9.2
detad
1202/99
si
laudividni
ot
deltitne
noitces
fo
snoisivorp
ehT
s/u
etaber
fo
gnilif
ot
gnitaler
,931
xat
morf
A78
ylppa
ton
dluow
,nruter
neht
,elbayap
roines
deificeps
a
ot
emas
eht
.Y.A
eht
rof
nezitic
eb
dluohs
ni
.Y.P
eht
ot
tnaveler
tceffe
nevig
neeb
sah
xat
hcihw
]ot
.)1(P491
s/u
detcuded
fo
ytilibacilppa-noN
emit
eht
tA
fo
%1.0
ynA
si
ohw
,reyuB
shkal
`
>
fo
esahcruP
Q491
Q491
s/u
SDT
fo
tiderc
fo
mus
tnediser
rof
elbisnopser
suoiverp
a
ni
sdoog
hcihw
no
snoitcasnarT
ot
mus
hcus
gnideecxe
mus
yna
gniyap
raey
tnuocca
eht
shkal
`
tnediser
yna
ot
elbitcuded
si
xaT
)a(
relles
eht
fo
fo
esahcrup
rof
eht
fo
yna
rednu
eht
ta
ro
.sdoog
;tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
fo
emit
a
snaem
reyuB
s/u
elbitcelloc
si
xaT
)b(
,tnemyap
esohw
nosrep
naht
rehto
,C602
si
revehcihw
,selas
latot
)H1(C602
noitces
.reilrae
stpiecer
ssorg
7.58 INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
ot
noitcasnart
a
fo esac
nI
revonrut
ro
noitces
htob
hcihw
ssenisub
morf
Q491
noitces
dna
)H1(602
`
sdeecxe
ot
deriuqer
si xat
,seilppa
gnirud
serorc
.Q491
s/u
detcuded
eb
YF
eht
stniop
rehtO
yletaidemmi
eht
gnidecerp
si
mus
eht
erehW
eht
hcihw
ni
YF
,tnuocca
yna
ot
detiderc
fo
esahcrup
esnepsuS“
dellac
rehtehw
deirrac
si
sdoog
rehto
yna
yb
ro
”tnuocca
.tuo
fo
skoob
eht
ni ,eman
nosrep
eht
fo
tnuocca
hcus
yap
ot
elbail
gnitiderc
hcus
,emocni
eb
ot
demeed
eb
llahs
fo
tnuocca
eht
ot tiderc
eht
rof
eeyap
eht
.noitces
siht
fo
sesoprup
ro
tifeneb
eht
erehW
erofeB
fo
%01
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
eulaV
tifeneb
ynA
R491
ni
yllohw
si
etisiuqrep
gnidivorp
ro
eulav
tnediser
na
naht
rehto(
fo
etagergga
,etisiuqrep
ro
dna
hsac
ni
yltrap
ro
dnik
hcus
etagergga
ro
laudividni
fo
eulav
rehtehw
trap
eht
tub
dnik
ni yltrap
ro
tifeneb
fo
eulav
fo
esohw
FUH
ro
tifeneb
elbitrevnoc
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.5 9
a
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
ot
tneiciffus
ton
si
hsac
ni
etisiuqrep
hcus
,selas
latot
>
etisiuqrep
ro
yenom
otni
fo
ytilibail
eht
teem
ro
tifeneb
stpiecer
ssorg
a
ni
000,02
`
gnisira
,ton
ni
xat
fo
noitcuded
etisiuqrep
revonrut
ro
.Y.F
ssenisub
morf
hcus
fo
elohw
fo
tcepser
ton
seod
eht
ro
eht
,etisiuqrep
ro
tifeneb
deecxe
a
fo
esicrexe
rof
elbisnopser
nosrep
ni
erorc
`
.noisseforp
ro
tifeneb
hcus
gnidivorp
fo
esac
ehT
erofeb
,llahs
etisiuqrep
ro
ssenisub
snoisivorp
ro
tifeneb
eht
gnisaeler
ni
shkal
`
ylppa
dluow
taht
erusne
,etisiuqrep
fo
esac
tifeneb
yna
ot
ni
diap
neeb
sah
xat
noisseforp
,etisiuqrep
ro
ro
tifeneb
eht
fo
tcepser
eht
gnirud
ni
rehtehw
.etisiuqrep
yletaidemmi
ni
ro
hsac
).Y.F
gnidecerp
yltrap
ro
dnik
rof
elbisnopser
dna
hsac
ni
a
ot
gnidivorp
.dnik
ni
yltrap
yna
,tnediser
ro
tifeneb
.etisiuqrep
a
fo
esac
nI
,ynapmoc
nosrep“
rof
elbisnopser
7.60(cid:0)(cid:3) INCOME TAX LAW
tnaveler
rehtO
fo
emiT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
noitcuded
SDT
rof
timiL
tnemyap
fo
noitcuded
ecruos
ta
xat
snaem
”gniyap
ynapmoc
eht
gnidulcni
flesti
lapicnirP
eht
.foereht
reciffO
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.6 1
a
ILLUSTRATION 10
Examine the applicability of the provisions for tax deduction at source under section
194DA in the following cases -
(i) Mr. X, a resident, is due to receive ` 4.50 lakhs on 30.6.2024, towards maturity
proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.7.2021, for which the sum assured is ` 4
lakhs and the annual premium is ` 1,25,000.
(ii) Mr. Y, a resident, is due to receive ` 3.95 lakhs on 31.12.2024 on LIC policy
taken on 31.12.2011, for which the sum assured is ` 3.50 lakhs and the
annual premium is ` 26,100.
(iii) Mr. Z, a resident, is due to receive ` 95,000 on 1.8.2024 towards maturity
proceeds of LIC policy taken on 1.8.2017 for which the sum assured is
` 90,000 and the annual premium was ` 10,000.
SOLUTION 9.62
(i) Since the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of a
policy taken after 31.3.2012, the maturity proceeds of ` 4.50 lakhs due on
31.3.2024 are not exempt under section 10(10D) in the hands of Mr. X.
Therefore, tax is required to be deducted@5% under section 194DA on the
amount of income comprised therein i.e., on ` 75,000 (` 4,50,000, being
maturity proceeds - ` 3,75,000, being the aggregate amount of insurance
premium paid).
(ii) Since the annual premium is less than 20% of sum assured in respect of a
policy taken before 1.4.2012, the sum of ` 3.95 lakhs due to Mr. Y would be
exempt under section 10(10D) in his hands. Hence, no tax is required to be
deducted at source under section 194DA on such sum payable to Mr. Y.
(iii) Even though the annual premium exceeds 10% of sum assured in respect of
a policy taken after 31.3.2012, and consequently, the maturity proceeds of
` 95,000 due on 1.8.2024 would not be exempt under section 10(10D) in the
hands of Mr. Z, the tax deduction provisions under section 194DA are not
attracted since the maturity proceeds are less than ` 1 lakh.
ILLUSTRATION 11
Mr. X sold his house property in Bangalore as well as his rural agricultural land for
a consideration of ` 60 lakh and ` 15 lakh, respectively, to Mr. Y on 1.8.2024. He
has purchased the house property and the land in the year 2023 for ` 40 lakh and
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.6 3
a
` 10 lakh, respectively. The stamp duty value on the date of transfer, i.e., 1.8.2024,
is ` 85 lakh and ` 20 lakh for the house property and rural agricultural land,
respectively. Examine the tax implications in the hands of Mr. X and Mr. Y and the
TDS implications, if any, in the hands of Mr. Y, assuming that both Mr. X and Mr. Y
are resident Indians.
SOLUTION
(i) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. X
As per section 50C, the stamp duty value of house property (i.e. ` 85 lakh)
would be deemed to be the full value of consideration arising on transfer
of property, since the stamp duty value exceeds 110% of the
consideration received. Therefore, ` 45 lakh (i.e., ` 85 lakh – ` 40 lakh,
being the purchase price) would be taxable as short-term capital gains in
the A.Y.2025-26.
Since rural agricultural land is not a capital asset, the gains arising on sale
of such land is not taxable in the hands of Mr. X.
(ii) Tax implications in the hands of Mr. Y
In case immovable property is received for inadequate consideration, the
difference between the stamp value and actual consideration would be
taxable under section 56(2)(x), if such difference exceeds the higher of
` 50,000 and 10% of the consideration.
Therefore, in this case ` 25 lakh (` 85 lakh – ` 60 lakh) would be taxable in
the hands of Mr. Y under section 56(2)(x).
Since agricultural land is not a capital asset, the provisions of section
56(2)(x) are not attracted in respect of receipt of agricultural land for
inadequate consideration, since the definition of “property” under section
56(2)(x) includes only capital assets specified thereunder.
(iii) TDS implications in the hands of Mr. Y
Since the sale consideration of house property or the stamp duty value of
house property exceeds ` 50 lakh, Mr. Y is required to deduct tax at
source under section 194-IA. The tax to be deducted under section 194-IA
would be ` 85,000, being 1% of ` 85 lakhs (higher of ` 60 lakhs or ` 85
lakhs).
TDS provisions under section 194-IA are not attracted in respect of
transfer of rural agricultural land.
ILLUSTRATION 12
Mr. Sharma, a resident Indian aged 77 years, gets pension of ` 52,000 per month
from the UP State Government. The same is credited to his savings account in
SBI, Lucknow Branch. In addition, he gets interest@8% p.a. on fixed deposit of
` 20 lakh with the said bank. Out of the deposit of ` 20 lakh, ` 2 lakh represents
five year term deposit made by him on 1.4.2024. Interest on savings bank credited
to his SBI savings account for the P.Y.2024-25 is ` 9,500.
(1) From the above facts, compute the total income and tax liability of
Mr. Sharma for the A.Y. 2025-26, assuming that he has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(2) What would be the amount of tax deductible at source by SBI, assuming that
the same is a specified bank? Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of
income for A.Y.2025-26, if tax deductible at source has been fully deducted?
Examine.
(3) Is Mr. Sharma required to file his return of income for A.Y. 2025-26, if the
fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh was with Canara Bank instead of SBI, other facts
remaining the same?
SOLUTION
(1) Computation of total income of Mr. Sharma for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars ` `
I Salaries
Pension (` 52,000 x 12) 6,24,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) 50,000
5,74,000
II Income from Other Sources
Interest on fixed deposit (` 20 lakh x 8%) 1,60,000
Interest on savings account 9,500 1,69,500
Gross total income 7,43,500
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Under Section 80C
Five year term deposit (` 2 lakh, 1,50,000
restricted to ` 1.5 lakh)
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.6 5
a
Under section 80TTB
Interest on fixed deposit and savings
account, restricted to 50,000, since
Mr. Sharma is a resident Indian of the age 50,000 2,00,000
of 77 years.
Total Income 5,43,500
Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2025-26
Particulars `
Tax payable [` 43,500 x 20% + ` 10,000] 18,700
Add: Health and Education Cess@4% 748
Tax liability 19,448
Tax liability (rounded off) 19,450
(2) SBI, being a specified bank, is required to deduct tax at source u/s 194P and
remit the same to the Central Government. In such a case, Mr. Sharma
would not be required to file his return of income u/s 139.
(3) If the fixed deposit of ` 20 lakh is with a bank other than SBI, which is the
bank where his pension is credited, then, Mr. Sharma would not qualify as a
“specified senior citizen”. In this case, Mr. Sharma would have to file his
return of income u/s 139, since his total income (without giving effect to
deduction under Chapter VI-A) exceeds the basic exemption limit.
3.13 Income payable “net of tax” [Section 195A]
(1) Where, under an agreement or other arrangement, the tax chargeable on
any income referred to in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter is to be
borne by the person by whom the income is payable, then, for the purposes
of deduction of tax under those provisions such income shall be increased
to such amount as would, after deduction of tax thereon, be equal to the
net amount payable under such agreement or arrangement.
(2) However, no grossing up is required in the case of tax paid under section
192(1A) by an employer on the non-monetary perquisites provided to the
employee.
(3) When an amount is paid net of tax, the taxability has to be calculated by
grossing up the amount, since the tax itself represents the income of the
payee.
3.14 Interest or dividend or other sums payable to
Government, Reserve Bank or certain corporations
[Section 196]
(1) No deduction of tax shall be made by any person from any sums payable to -
(i) the Government; or
(ii) the Reserve Bank of India; or
(iii) a corporation established by or under a Central Act, which is, under any
law for the time being in force, exempt from income-tax on its income; or
(iv) a Mutual Fund1.
(2) This provision for non-deduction is applicable when such sum is payable to
the above entities by way of -
(i) interest or dividend in respect of securities or shares -
(a) owned by the above entities; or
(b) in which they have full beneficial interest or
(ii) any income accruing or arising to them.
4. CERTIFICATE FOR DEDUCTION OF TAX AT A
LOWER RATE [SECTION 197]
(1) This section applies where, in the case of any income of any person or sum
payable to any person, income-tax is required to be deducted at the time of
credit or payment, as the case may be, at the rates in force as per the
provisions of sections 192, 193, 194, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194-I,
194J, 194K, 194LA, 194M and 194Q*.
* With effect from 01.10.2024, 194Q has been inserted within the scope
of section 197 to provide an option to seek a lower deduction
certificate.
(2) In such cases, the assessee can make an application to the Assessing Officer
for deduction of tax at a lower rate or for non-deduction of tax.
(3) If the Assessing Officer is satisfied that the total income of the recipient
justifies the deduction of income-tax at lower rates or no deduction of
1 Specified under section 10(23D)
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.6 7
a
income-tax, as the case may be, he may give to the assessee such
certificate, as may be appropriate.
(4) Where the Assessing Officer issues such a certificate, then the person
responsible for paying the income shall deduct income-tax at such lower
rates specified in the certificate or deduct no tax, as the case may be, until
such certificate is cancelled by the Assessing Officer.
(5) Enabling powers have been conferred upon the CBDT to make rules for
prescribing the procedure in this regard.
5. NO DEDUCTION IN CERTAIN CASES
[SECTION 197A]
(1) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for receipt of dividend
without deduction of tax [Sub-section (1)]
(i) This section enables an individual, who is resident in India and whose
estimated total income of the previous year is less than the basic
exemption limit, to receive dividend, without deduction of tax at
source under section 194 on furnishing a declaration in duplicate in
the prescribed form [Form 15G] and verified in the prescribed manner.
(ii) The declaration in the above form is to be furnished in writing in
duplicate by the declarant to the person responsible for paying any
income of the nature referred to in section 194. The declaration will
have to be to the effect that the tax on the estimated total income of
the declarant of the previous year in which such income is to be
included in computing his total income will be Nil.
(2) Enabling provision for filing of declaration for non-deduction of tax
under section 192A or 193 or 194A or 194D or 194DA or 194-I or 194K
by persons, other than companies and firms [Sub-section (1A)]
No deduction of tax shall be made under the above provisions of the Act,
where a person, who is not a company or a firm, furnishes to the person
responsible for paying any income of the nature referred to in these
sections, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the prescribed form [Form
15G] to the effect that the tax on his estimated total income of the previous
year in which such income is to be included in computing his total income
will be Nil.
(3) Filing declaration not permissible if income/aggregate of incomes
exceed basic exemption limit [Sub-section (1B)]
Declaration cannot be furnished as per the above provisions, where -
(i) payments of dividend; or
(ii) payment of premature withdrawal from Employee Provident Fund; or
(iii) income from interest on securities or
(iv) interest other than “interest on securities” or units; or
(v) insurance commission; or
(vi) payment in respect of life insurance policy; or
(vii) rent; or
(viii) income from units; or
(ix) the aggregate of the amounts of such incomes in (i) to (viii) above
credited or paid or likely to be credited or paid during the previous year in
which such income is to be included exceeds the basic exemption limit.
(4) Enabling provision for filing of declaration by resident senior citizens
for non-deduction of tax at source [Sub-section (1C)]
For a resident individual, who is of the age of 60 years or more at any time
during the previous year, no deduction of tax shall be made under section
192A or section 193 or section 194 or section 194A or section 194D or section
194DA or section 194EE or section 194-I or section 194K, if such individual
furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate in Form 15H to the payer, that tax
on his estimated total income of the previous year in which such income is to
be included in computing his total income is Nil. The restriction contained in
sub-section (1B) will not apply to resident senior citizens.
(5) Non-deduction of tax in certain cases
Payments to notified person or class of persons including
institutions/class of institutions etc. [Sub-section (1F)]
No deduction of tax shall be made or deduction of tax shall be made at
such lower rate, from such payment to such person or class of persons,
including institution, association or body or class of institutions or
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.6 9
a
associations or bodies as may be notified by the Central Government in the
Official Gazette in this behalf. Therefore, in respect of such payments made
to notified person or class of persons, no tax is to be deducted at source or
tax is to be deducted at lower rate.
(6) Time limit for delivery of one copy of declaration [Sub-section (2)]
On receipt of the declaration referred to in sub-sections (1), (1A) or (1C), the
person responsible for making the payment will be required to deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner, one copy of the
declaration on or before the 7th of the month following the month in
which the declaration is furnished to him.
6. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
6.1 Tax deducted is income received [Section 198]
(1) All sums deducted in accordance with the foregoing provisions shall, for the
purpose of computing the income of an assessee, be deemed to be income
received.
(2) However, the following tax paid or deducted would not be deemed to be
income received by the assessee for the purpose of computing the total
income –
(i) the tax paid by an employer under section 192(1A) on non-monetary
perquisites provided to the employees
(ii) tax deducted under section 194N
6.2 Credit for tax deducted at source [Section 199]
(1) Tax deducted at source in accordance with the above provisions and paid to
the credit of the Central Government shall be treated as payment of tax on
behalf of the-
(i) person from whose income the deduction was made; or
(ii) owner of the security; or
(iii) depositor; or
(iv) owner of property; or
(v) unit-holder; or
(vi) shareholder.
(2) Any sum referred to in section 192(1A) and paid to the Central Government,
shall be treated as the tax paid on behalf of the person in respect of whose
income, such payment of tax has been made.
(3) The CBDT is empowered to frame rules for the purpose of giving credit in
respect of tax deducted or tax paid under Chapter XVII. The CBDT also has
the power to make rules for giving credit to a person other than the persons
mentioned in (1) and (2) above. Further, the CBDT can specify the
assessment year for which such credit may be given.
6.3 Duty of person deducting tax [Section 200]
(1) The persons responsible for deducting the tax at source should deposit the
sum so deducted to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board
directs, within the prescribed time.
(2) Further, an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites provided to
employees in accordance with section 192(1A), should deposit within the
prescribed time, the tax to the credit of the Central Government or as the
Board directs.
(3) Rule 30 prescribes the time and mode of payment to Government account
of TDS or tax paid under section 192(1A) and Rule 31A provides for
submission of quarterly statements by every person responsible for
deduction of tax [depicted in the diagram given in page 7.75]
However, every person responsible for deduction of tax under section 194-
IA, 194-IB or 194M have to furnish to the Principal Director General of
Income-tax (Systems) (in case of sections 194-IB and 194M) or Director
General of Income-tax (System) or the person authorised by them, a
challan-cum-statement in Form No.26QB, 26QC or 26QD respectively, within
thirty days from the end of the month of deduction of tax.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7 1
a
6.4 Correction of arithmetic mistakes and adjustment of
incorrect claim during computerized processing of TDS
and other statements [Section 200A]
(1) At present, all statements of tax deducted at source are filed in an electronic
mode, thereby facilitating computerised processing of these statements.
Therefore, in order to process TDS statements on computer, electronic
processing on the same lines as processing of income-tax returns has been
provided in section 200A.
(2) The following adjustments can be made during the computerized
processing of statement of tax deducted at source or a correction statement
–
(i) any arithmetical error in the statement; or
(ii) an incorrect claim, if such incorrect claim is apparent from any
information in the statement.
(3) The term “an incorrect claim apparent from any information in the
statement” shall mean such claim on the basis of an entry, in the
statement,–
(i) of an item, which is inconsistent with another entry of the same or
some other item in such statement;
(ii) in respect of rate of deduction of tax at source, where such rate is not
in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
(4) The interest, if any, has to be computed on the basis of the sums deductible
as computed in the statement;
(5) The fee, if any, has to be computed in accordance with the provision of
section 234E. A fee of ` 200 for every day would be levied under section
234E for late furnishing of TDS statement from the due date of furnishing of
TDS statement to the date of furnishing of TDS/ statement. However, the total
amount of fee shall not exceed the total amount of tax deductible/collectible
and such fee has to be paid before delivering the TDS statement.
(6) The sum payable by, or the amount of refund due to, the deductor has to
be determined after adjustment of interest and fee against the amount paid
under section 200 or section 201 or section 234E and any amount paid
otherwise by way of tax or interest or fee.
(7) An intimation will be prepared and generated and sent to the deductor,
specifying his tax liability or the refund due, within one year from the end of
the financial year in which the statement is filed. The refund due shall be
granted to the deductor.
(8) For this purpose, the CBDT is empowered to make a scheme for centralized
processing of statements of TDS to determine the tax payable by, or refund
due to, the deductor.
The Board may make a scheme for processing of statements made by any
other person, not being a deductor.
6.5 Consequences of failure to deduct or pay [Section 201]
(1) Deemed assessee-in-default
Any person including the principal officer of a company -
(i) who is required to deduct any sum in accordance with the provisions
of the Act; or
(ii) an employer paying tax on non-monetary perquisites under section
192(1A).
shall be deemed to be an assessee-in-default, if he does not deduct, or
does not pay or after deducting, fails to pay, the whole or any part of the
tax, as required by or under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
(2) Non-applicability of deeming provision
Any person (including the principal officer of the company) who fails to
deduct the whole or any part of the tax on the amount credited or paid to a
payee shall not be deemed to be an assessee-in-default in respect of such
tax if such payee –
(i) has furnished his return of income under section 139;
(ii) has taken into account such sum for computing income in such return
of income; and
(iii) has paid the tax due on the income declared by him in such return of
income,
and the payer furnishes a certificate to this effect from an accountant in
such form as may be prescribed.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7 3
a
(3) Interest Liability
(i) A person deemed to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1),
for failure to deduct tax or to pay the tax after deduction, is liable to
pay simple interest @ 1% for every month or part of month on the
amount of such tax from the date on which tax was deductible to the
date on which such tax was actually deducted and simple interest
@ 1½% for every month or part of month from the date on which tax
was deducted to the date on which such tax is actually paid [Section
201(1A)].
(ii) Such interest should be paid before furnishing the statements in
accordance with section 200(3).
(iii) Where the payer fails to deduct the whole or any part of the tax on
the amount credited or payment made to a payee and is not deemed
to be an assessee-in-default under section 201(1) on account of
payment of taxes by such payee, interest under section 201(1A)(i)
i.e.,@1% p.m. or part of month, shall be payable by the payer from the
date on which such tax was deductible to the date of furnishing of
return of income by such payee. The date of deduction and payment
of taxes by the payer shall be deemed to be the date on which return
of income has been furnished by the payee.
However, where an order is made by the Assessing Officer for
assessee-in-default, the interest shall be paid by the person in
accordance with such order.
(iv) Where the tax has not been paid after it is deducted, the amount of the
tax together with the amount of simple interest thereon shall be a charge
upon all the assets of the person or the company, as the case may be.
6.6 Certificate for tax deducted [Section 203]
(1) Every person deducting tax at source have to issue a certificate to the effect
that tax has been deducted and specify the amount so deducted, the rate at
which tax has been deducted and such other particulars as may be
prescribed.
(2) Every person, being an employer, referred to in section 192(1A) shall, within
such period, as may be prescribed, furnish to the person in respect of whose
income such payment of tax has been made, a certificate to the effect that
tax has been paid to the Central Government, and specify the amount so
paid, the rate at which the tax has been paid and such other particulars as
may be prescribed.
(3) Certificate of TDS to be furnished under section 203 [Rule 31]
The certificate of deduction of tax at source to be furnished under section
203 shall be in Form No.16 in respect of tax deducted or paid under section
192 and in any other case, Form No.16A.
Form No.16 shall be issued to the employee annually by 15th June of the
financial year immediately following the financial year in which the income
was paid and tax deducted. Form No.16A shall be issued quarterly within 15
days from the due date for furnishing the statement of TDS under Rule 31A.
Form No. 16B, 16C or 16D shall be issued by the every person responsible
for deduction of tax under section 194-IA, 194-IB or 194M to the payee
within fifteen days from the due date for furnishing the challan-cum-
statement in Form No. 26QB, 26QC or 26QD, respectively, under rule 31A.
Note – The entire TDS process can be understood at a glance from the
diagram given in the next page. The reference to Rules and Forms are only for
the information of students. They are, however, not required to memorize the
Rule numbers and Form numbers for examination purposes.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7 5
a
Deduction of tax at source
Sections 193, 194A, 194C, 194D, 194G, 194H, 194- Sections 192, 192A, 194, 194B, 194BB, 194DA, 194LA,
I/IA/IB, 194J, 194K, 194M, 194Q 194N, 194P2, 194R
Deduct tax at the time of credit to the Deduct tax at the time of payment
a/c of the payee or payment,
Remittance [Rule 30]
whichever is earlier
Tax deducted by an office of Govt. Other deductors
Where tax is Where tax is paid (i) Cases (other than # (ii) (iii) (iv) (iv)
paid without accompanied by (ii), (iii) & (iv) u/s u/s u/s u/s
production of an IT challan 192/ 194- 194- 194M
challan 194A/ IA IB
194D/
Income/Amt is 194H
credited or paid in
March Any other
On the same day On or before 7 month Qtly payt 30 days from the end of the
days from the 30th On or before 7 7th July/ month of deduction
end of the month April days from the 7th Oct/ 7th
of deduction end of the Jan/ 30th
month of April
dedn.
PAO/TO/CDDO Furnishing Stt of TDS [Rule 31A] Rule 31A - Furnish Challan-
[Form 24Q3/27Q4/26Q5] cum-stt in Form
Qtr ending Due date 26QB/26QC/26QD with 30
Submit Statement in Form 24G to 30th June 31st July days from the end of the
agency authorised by PDIT (Sys) 30th Sep 31st Oct month of deduction
31st Dec 31st Jan
31St March 31st May
Where Where Stt Furnishing Certificate of TDS Rule 31 -Furnish
Stt relates to [Rule 31] Certificate to the payee
relates to other months within 15 days from the
Deduction u/s 192 or Deduction under
March above due date in Form
194P other sections
16B/16C/16D
Form 16 Form 16A
On or On or before By 15th June of the Within 15 days from
before 15 days from immediately following the due date for
30th April end of the F.Y. furnishing TDS
relevant month statement
# In special cases, the A.O. may,
with the prior approval of the JC,
permit quarterly payment of TDS
2 TDS is required to be deducted at the time of payment, if declaration is furnished by the specified senior citizen
3 If deduction of tax is under section 192 or 194P
4 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of deductee who is a non-corporate non-
resident or a foreign company or RNOR
5 If deduction of tax is u/s 193 to 196D other than section 194P in respect of all other deductees
6.7 Person responsible for paying taxes deducted at source
[Section 204]
For purposes of deduction of tax at source the expression “person responsible
for paying” means:
Nature of income/payment Person responsible for paying tax
(1) Salary (other than payment of (i) the employer himself; or
salaries by the Central or State (ii) if the employer is a company, the
Government) company itself, including the
principal officer thereof.
(2) Interest on securities (other than the local authority, corporation or
payments by or on behalf of the company, including the principal
Central or State Government) officer thereof.
(3) Any sum payable to a non- the “Authorised Person” responsible for
resident Indian, representing remitting such sum to the non-resident
consideration for the transfer by Indian or for crediting such sum to his
him of any foreign exchange Non-resident (External) Account
asset, which is not a short term maintained in accordance with the
capital asset Foreign Exchange Management Act,
1999 and any rules made thereunder.
(4) furnishing of information (i) the payer himself; or
relating to payment to a non- (ii) if the payer is a company, the
corporate non-resident, or to a company itself including the
foreign company, of any sum, principal officer thereof.
whether or not chargeable
under the provisions of this Act
(5) Credit/payment of any other (i) the payer himself; or
sum chargeable under the (ii) if the payer is a company, the
provisions of the Act company itself including the
principal officer thereof.
(6) Credit/payment of any sum (i) the drawing and disbursing
chargeable under the provisions officer; or
of the Act made by or on behalf (ii) any other person, by whatever
of the Central Government or name called, responsible for
the Government of a State. crediting, or as the case may be,
paying such sum.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7 7
a
(7) In case of a person not resident (i) the person himself; or
in India (irrespective of the (ii) any person authorized by such
nature of payment or income) person; or
(iii) the agent of such person in India
including any person treated as an
agent under section 163.
6.8 Bar against direct demand on assessee [Section 205]
Where tax is deductible at source under any of the aforesaid sections, the
assessee shall not be called upon to pay the tax himself to the extent to which tax
has been deducted from that income.
6.9 Mandatory requirement of furnishing PAN in all TDS
statements, bills, vouchers and correspondence between
deductor and deductee [Section 206AA]
(1) The non-furnishing of PAN by deductees in many cases have led to delay in
issue of refund on account of problems in the processing of returns of
income and in granting credit for tax deducted at source.
(2) With a view to strengthening the PAN mechanism, section 206AA provides
that any person whose receipts are subject to deduction of tax at source i.e.
the deductee, shall mandatorily furnish his PAN to the deductor failing
which the deductor shall deduct tax at source at higher of the following
rates –
(i) the rate prescribed in the Act;
(ii) at the rate in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the Finance Act; or
(iii) at the rate of 20%. [5% in case tax is required to be deducted at
source u/s 194Q]
For instance, in case of rental payment for plant and machinery, where the
payee does not furnish his PAN to the payer, tax would be deductible @20%
instead of @2% prescribed under section 194-I. However, non-furnishing of
PAN by the deductee in case of income by way of winnings from lotteries,
card games etc., would result in tax being deducted at the existing rate of
30% under section 194B. Therefore, wherever tax is deductible at a rate
higher than 20%, this provision would not have any impact.
(3) Tax would be deductible at the rates mentioned above also in cases where
the taxpayer files a declaration in Form 15G or 15H (under section 197A) but
does not provide his PAN.
(4) Further, no certificate under section 197 will be granted by the Assessing
Officer unless the application contains the PAN of the applicant.
(5) Both the deductor and the deductee have to compulsorily quote the PAN of
the deductee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other documents
exchanged between them.
(6) If the PAN provided to the deductor is invalid or it does not belong to the
deductee, it shall be deemed that the deductee has not furnished his PAN to the
deductor. Accordingly, tax would be deductible at the rate specified in (2) above.
Note: The applicability of provisions of section 206AA on non-resident will be
dealt with at the Final Level.
6.10 Higher rate of TDS for non-filers of income-tax return
[Section 206AB]
(1) Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of
this Chapter on any sum or income or amount paid, or payable or credited,
by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
(i) at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provisions of the Act;
(ii) at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the
Finance Act; or
(iii) at 5%
However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source
under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M6 or
194N.
(2) In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified
person, in addition to the provisions of this section, then, tax is required to
be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and
section 206AB.
6 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level)
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.7 9
a
(3) Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and
tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous
year.
However, the specified person would not include
- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in
India7; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by
the Central Government in this behalf.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 45/2024 dated
27.5.2024, notified the RBI as a person to not include in the
definition of specified person.
7. ADVANCE PAYMENT OF TAX [SECTIONS 207
TO 219]
7.1 Liability for payment of advance tax
(1) Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year, in accordance
with the provisions of sections 208 to 219, in respect of an assessee’s
current income i.e. the total income of the assessee which would be
chargeable to tax for the assessment year immediately following that
financial year [Section 207].
(2) Under section 208, obligation to pay advance tax arises in every case where
the advance tax payable is ` 10,000 or more.
Note - An assessee who is liable to pay advance tax of less than ` 10,000 will
not be saddled with interest under sections 234B and 234C for defaults in
7“Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the enterprise
is wholly or partly carried on. This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final level.
payment of advance tax. However, the consequences under section 234A
regarding interest for belated filing of return would be attracted.
(3) In case of senior citizens who have passive source of income like interest,
rent, etc., the requirement of payment of advance tax causes genuine
compliance hardship. Therefore, in order to reduce the compliance burden
on such senior citizens, exemption from payment of advance tax has been
provided to a resident individual-
(i) not having any income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession”; and
(ii) of the age of 60 years or more.
Such senior citizens need not pay advance tax and are allowed to discharge
their tax liability (other than TDS) by payment of self-assessment tax.
7.2 Computation of advance tax
(1) An assessee has to estimate his current income and pay advance tax
thereon. He need not submit any estimate or statement of income to the
Assessing Officer, except where he has been served with notice by the
Assessing Officer.
(2) Where an obligation to pay advance tax has arisen, the assessee shall
himself compute the advance tax payable on his current income at the rates
in force in the financial year and deposit the same, whether or not he has
been earlier assessed to tax.
(3) In the case of a person who has been already assessed by way of a regular
assessment in respect of the total income of any previous year, the
Assessing Officer, if he is of the opinion that such person is liable to pay
advance tax, may serve an order under section 210(3) requiring the assessee
to pay advance tax.
(4) For this purpose, the total income of the latest previous year in respect of
which the assessee has been assessed by way of regular assessment or the
total income returned by the assessee in any return of income for any
subsequent previous year, whichever is higher, shall be taken as the basis
for computation of advance tax payable.
(5) The above order can be served by the Assessing Officer at any time during
the financial year but not later than the last date of February.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.8 1
a
(6) If, after sending the above notice, but before 1st March of the financial year,
the assessee furnishes a return relating to any later previous year or an
assessment is completed in respect of a later return of income, the
Assessing Officer may amend the order for payment of advance tax on the
basis of the computation of the income so returned or assessed.
(7) If the assessee feels that his own estimate of advance tax payable would be
less than the one sent by the Assessing Officer, he can file estimate of his
current income and advance tax payable thereon.
(8) Where the advance tax payable on assessee’s estimation is higher than the
tax computed by the Assessing Officer, then, the advance tax shall be paid
based upon such higher amount.
(9) In all cases, the tax calculated shall be reduced by the amount of tax
deductible at source.
No reduction of ‘tax deductible but not deducted’ while computing
advance tax liability
(i) As per the provisions of section 209, the amount of advance tax payable
by a person is computed by reducing the amount of income-tax which
would be deductible at source during the financial year from any income
which has been taken into account in computing the total income.
(ii) Some courts have opined that in case where the payer pays any
amount (on which tax is deductible at source) without deduction of
tax at source, the payee shall not be liable to pay advance tax to the
extent tax is deductible from such amount.
(iii) With a view to make such a person (payee) liable to pay advance tax,
the proviso to section 209(1)(d) provides that the amount of tax
deductible at source but not so deducted by the payer shall not be
reduced from the income tax liability of the payee for determining his
liability to pay advance tax.
(iv) In effect, only if tax has actually been deducted at source, the same
can be reduced for computing advance tax liability of the payee. Tax
deductible but not so deducted cannot be reduced for computing
advance tax liability of the payee.
(10) The amount of advance tax payable by an assessee in the financial year
calculated by -
(i) the assessee himself based on his estimation of current income; or
(ii) the Assessing Officer as a result of an order under section 210(3) or
amended order under section 210(4)
is subject to the provisions of section 209(2), as per which the net
agricultural income has to be considered for the purpose of computing
advance tax.
7.3 Instalments of advance tax and due dates
(1) Common advance tax payment schedule for both corporates and non-
corporates [Other than assessees computing profits on presumptive
basis under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)]:
Due date of instalment Amount payable
On or before 15th June Not less than 15% of advance tax liability
On or before 15th Not less than 45% of advance tax liability, as
September reduced by the amount, if any, paid in the
earlier instalment.
On or before 15th Not less than 75% of advance tax liability, as
December reduced by the amount or amounts, if any,
paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.
On or before 15th March The whole amount of advance tax liability as
reduced by the amount or amounts, if any,
paid in the earlier instalment or instalments.
Note - Any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March
shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending
on 31st March.
(2) Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive
basis under section 44AD(1)or section 44ADA(1)
An eligible assessee, opting for computation of profits or gains of business
on presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section
44AD(1) or for computation of profits or gains of profession on presumptive
basis in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.8 3
a
be required to pay advance tax of the whole amount in one instalment on
or before 15th March of the financial year.
However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March
shall also be treated as advance tax paid during each financial year ending
on 31st March.
(3) If the last day for payment of any instalment of advance tax is a day on
which the receiving bank is closed, the assessee can make the payment on
the next immediately following working day, and in such cases, the interest
leviable under sections 234B and 234C would not be charged.
(4) Where advance tax is payable by virtue of the notice of demand issued8 by
the Assessing Officer, the whole or the appropriate part of the advance tax
specified in such notice shall be payable on or before each of such due
dates as fall after the date of service of notice of demand.
(5) Where the assessee does not pay any instalment by the due date, he shall
be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such instalment.
7.4 Credit for advance tax [Section 219]
Any sum, other than interest or penalty, paid by or recovered from an assessee
as advance tax, is treated as a payment of tax in respect of the income of the
previous year and credit thereof shall be given in the regular assessment.
7.5 Interest for non-payment or short-payment of advance
tax [Section 234B]
(1) Interest under section 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or
payment of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.
(2) The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from
1st April following the financial year upto the date of determination of
income under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, upto
the date of such regular assessment.
(3) Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the
assessed tax and the advance tax paid.
8 under section 156
(4) Assessed tax is the tax calculated on total income determined under section
143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, the tax on the total income
determined under such regular assessment less
- tax deducted or collected at source.
- any relief of tax allowed under section 89
- any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) would not include
the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143.
Tax on the total income determined under such regular assessment would
not include the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B.
Section 140B is discussed in detail in Chapter 8.
(5) However, where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee under section
140A or otherwise, interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of
such tax and reduced by the interest, if any, paid under section 140A
towards the interest chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall
be calculated at 1% on the amount by which the tax so paid together with
the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed tax.
7.6 Interest payable for deferment of advance tax
[Section 234C]
(1) Manner of computation of interest under section 234C for deferment
of advance tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:
In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and
gains in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section
44ADA(1), who is liable to pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to
pay such tax or the advance tax paid by such assessee on its current
income on or before the dates specified in column (1) is less than the
specified percentage [given in column (2)] of tax due on returned income,
then simple interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4)
on the amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable under section
234C.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.8 5
a
Specified Specified Shortfall in advance tax Period
date %
(1) (2) (3) (4)
15th June 15% 15% of tax due on returned 3 months
income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th June
15th 45% 45% of tax due on returned 3 months
September income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th September
15th 75% 75% of tax due on returned 3 months
December income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th December
15th March 100% 100% of tax due on returned 1 month
income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th March
Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current
income, on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or
36% of the tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee
shall not be liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on
those dates.
(2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who
declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section
44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):
In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the
section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), as the case may be, who is liable to
pay advance tax under section 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance
tax paid by the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is
less than the tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be
liable to pay simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall
from the tax due on the returned income.
(3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:
Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall
in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on
account of under-estimation of or failure to estimate –
(i) the amount of capital gains;
(ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from
lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;
(iii) income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in cases
where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the first time.
(iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred
u/s 2(22)(e)
However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax
payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) or (iv), as the
case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of
the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such
instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year.
(4) Meaning of tax due on returned income
Tax due on returned income means the tax calculated on total income
declared in the return furnished by the assessee less
- tax deducted or collected at source
- any relief of tax allowed under section 89
- any tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
8. TAX COLLECTION AT SOURCE
(1) Applicability and Rates
(i) Sale of certain goods
Under section 206C(1), sellers of certain goods are required to collect
tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified percentage for
collection of tax at source is as follows:
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.8 7
a
Nature of Goods Percentage
(a) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption 1%
(b) Tendu leaves 5%
(c) Timber obtained under a forest lease 2.5%
(d) Timber obtained by any mode other than (c) 2.5%
(e) Any other forest produce not being timber or 2.5%
tendu leaves
(f) Scrap 1%
(g) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore 1%
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount
payable by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such
amount from the buyer, whichever is earlier.
Non-applicability of TCS u/s 206C(1) [Section 206C(1A)]
No collection of tax shall be made under section 206C(1), in the case
of a resident buyer, if such buyer furnishes to the person responsible
for collecting tax, a declaration in writing in duplicate in the
prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner to the effect
that goods referred to in section 206C(1) above are to be utilised for
the purpose of manufacturing, processing or producing articles or
things or for the purposes of generation of power and not for trading
purposes.
(ii) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry
Section 206C(1C) provides for collection of tax by every person who
grants a lease or a licence or enters into a contract or otherwise
transfers any right or interest in any
- parking lot or
- toll plaza or
- a mine or a quarry
to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of
such parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of
business. The tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or
lessee of any such licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at
the rate of 2%.
Mining and quarrying would not include mining and quarrying of
mineral oil. Mineral oil includes petroleum and natural gas.
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount
payable by the licensee or lessee to his account or at the time of
receipt of such amount from the licensee or lessee, whichever is
earlier.
(iii) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs
Section 206C(1F) provides that every person, being a seller, who
receives any amount as consideration for sale of a motor vehicle of
the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the time of receipt of such
amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale consideration.
With effect from 01.01.2025, the scope of section 206C(1F) has been
expanded to include every person, being a seller, who receives any
amount as consideration for sale of any other notified goods exceeding
` 10 lakhs, to, at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the
buyer@1% of the sale consideration.
(iv) Remittance under LRS of RBI through an authorized dealer or
purchase of an overseas tour package
Section 206C(1G) provides for collection of tax by every person,
- being an authorized dealer, who receives amount, under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme of the RBI, for remittance from a
buyer, being a person remitting such amount;
- being a seller of an overseas tour programme package who
receives any amount from the buyer who purchases the package
Tax has to be collected at the time of debiting the amount payable by
the buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said
buyer, by any mode, whichever is earlier.
Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of
an overseas tour programme package
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.8 9
a
S. Amount and purpose of remittance Rate of TCS
No.
(i) Where the amount is for purchase of an 5% till ` 7
overseas tour programme package lakhs, 20%
thereafter
(ii) Where the amount is remitted outside No TCS upto
India - ` 7 lakhs
(a) for the purpose of education or 5% of the amt
medical treatment or agg. of amts
in excess of ` 7
lakh
If amount remitted is out of a loan 0.5% of the amt
obtained from any financial or agg. of amts
institution as defined in section 80E, in excess of ` 7
for the purpose of pursuing any lakh
education
(b) where the amount is remitted for the 20% of the amt
purpose other than mentioned in (a) or agg. of amts
above in excess of
` 7 lakh
Cases where no tax is to be collected
(i) No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of
which the sum has been collected by the seller
(ii) No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any
other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax
(iii) No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State
Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a
commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign
State, a local authority9 or any other person notified by the
Central Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions
stipulated thereunder.
9 as defined in Explanation to section 10(20)
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated
17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G)
would not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-
resident in India in terms of section 6 and does not have a
permanent establishment in India.
(v) Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh
(a) As per section 206C(1H), tax is also required to be collected by a
seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale of
goods of the value or aggregate of such value exceeding
` 50 lakhs in a previous year [other than exported goods or
goods covered under sub-sections (1)/(1F)/(1G)].
(b) Tax is to be collected at source @0.1% u/s 206C(1H) of the sale
consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs, at the time of receipt of
consideration.
(c) Tax is, however, not required to be collected if the buyer is liable
to deduct tax at source under any other provision of the Act on
the goods purchased by him from the seller and has deducted
such tax.
(vi) Power of the CBDT to issue guidelines
In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
section 206C(1G)/(1H), the CBDT is empowered to issue guidelines,
with the approval of the Central Government, for the purpose of
removing the difficulty.
Every guideline issued by the CBDT shall be laid before each House of
Parliament, and shall be binding on the income-tax authorities and on
the person liable to collect tax.
In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the
approval of Central Government, vide this circular, issued the following
guidelines for removing certain difficulties –
Question 1: Whether payment through overseas credit card would be
counted in LRS?
Answer: No TCS shall be applicable on expenditure through
international credit card while being overseas till further order.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9 1
a
Question 2: Whether the threshold of ` 7 lakh, for TCS to become
applicable on LRS, applies separately for various purposes like
education, health treatment and others? For example, if remittance of
` 7 lakh under LRS is made in a financial year for education purpose
and other remittances in the same financial year of ` 7 lakh is made for
medical treatment and ` 7 lakh for other purposes, whether the
exemption limit of ` 7 lakh shall be given to each of the three
separately?
Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 7 lakh for LRS is combined
threshold for applicability of the TCS on LRS irrespective of the purpose
of the remittance. Thus, in the given example, upto ` 7 lakh remittance
under LRS during a financial year shall not be liable for TCS. However,
subsequent ` 14 lakh remittance under LRS shall be liable for TCS in
accordance with the TCS rates applicable for such remittance. TCS rates
would be applicable as under:-
Remittances Rate of TCS
First ` 7 lakh remittance under No TCS
LRS during the financial year
2024-25 for education purpose
(or for that matter any
purpose)
Remittances beyond ` 7 lakh TCS at 0.5% (if it is for education
under LRS during the financial purpose financed by loan from a
year 2024-25 financial institution), 5% (if it is for
education or medical treatment)
and 20% (if it is for other purposes)
Question 3: Whether the threshold of ` 7 lakh, for TCS to become
applicable on LRS, applies separately for each remittance through
different authorised dealers? If not, how will authorised dealer know
about the earlier remittances by that remitter through some other
authorised dealer?
Answer: It is clarified that the threshold of ` 7 lakh for LRS is qua
remitter and not qua authorised dealer. Since the facility to provide real
time update of remittance under LRS by remitter is still under
development by the RBl, it is clarified that the details of earlier
remittances under LRS by the remitter during the financial year may be
taken by the authorised dealer through an undertaking at the time of
remittance. If the authorised dealer correctly collects the tax at source
based on information given in this undertaking, he will not be treated
as "assessee in default". However, for any false information in the
undertaking, appropriate action may be taken against the remitter
under the Act.
It is further clarified that same methodology of taking undertaking from
the buyer of overseas tour program package may be followed by the
seller of such package.
Question 4: There is threshold of ` 7 lakh for remittance under LRS for
TCS to become applicable while there is another threshold of ` 7 lakh
for purchase of overseas tour program package where reduced rate of
5% of TCS applies. Whether these two thresholds apply independently?
Answer: Yes, these two thresholds apply independently. For LRS, the
threshold of ` 7 lakh applies to make TCS applicable. For purchase of
overseas tour program package, the threshold of ` 7 lakh applies to
determine the applicable TCS rate as 5% or 20%.
Question 5: A resident individual spends ` 3 lakh for purchase of
overseas tour program package from a foreign tour operator and remits
money which is classified under LRS. There is no other remittance under
LRS or purchase of overseas tour program during the financial year.
Whether TCS is applicable?
Answer: ln case of purchase of overseas tour program package which is
classified under LRS, TCS provision for purchase of overseas tour
program package shall apply and not TCS provisions for remittance
under LRS. Since for purchase of overseas tour program package, the
threshold of ` 7 lakh for applicability of TCS does not apply, TCS is
applicable and tax is required to be collected by the seller. ln this case
the tax shall be required to be collected at 5% since the total amount
spent on purchase of overseas tour program package during the
financial year is less than ` 7 lakh. The TCS should be made by the
seller.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9 3
a
Question 6: There are different rates for remittance under LRS for
medical treatment/education purposes and for other purposes. What is
the scope of remittance under LRS for medical treatment/education
purposes?
Answer: As per the clarification by the RBl, remittance for the purposes
of medical treatment shall include,-
(i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person to be treated
medically overseas (and his attendant) for commuting between
lndia and the overseas destination;
(ii) his medical expense; and
(iii) other day to day expenses required for such purpose.
Education Remittance for purpose of education shall include,-
(i) remittance for purchase of tickets of the person undertaking study
overseas for commuting between lndia and the overseas
destination;
(ii) the tuition and other fees to be paid to educational institute; and
(iii) other day to day expenses required for undertaking such study.
Question 7: Whether purchase of international travel ticket or hotel
accommodation on standalone basis is purchase of overseas tour
program package?
Answer: The term 'overseas tour program package' is defined as to
mean any tour package which offers visit to a country or countries or
territory or territories outside lndia and includes expenses for travel or
hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any other expenditure of similar
nature or in relation thereto.
It is clarified that purchase of only international travel ticket or
purchase of only hotel accommodation, by in itself is not covered within
the definition of 'overseas tour program package'. To qualify as
'overseas tour program package', the package should include at least
two of the followings:
(i) international travel ticket,
(ii) hotel accommodation (with or without food)/boarding/lodging,
(iii) any other expenditure of similar nature or in relation thereto.
(2) Meaning of certain terms
Term Meaning
(i) Overseas For section 206C(1G)
tour Any tour package which offers visit to a country/(ies)
program or territory/(ies) outside India. It includes expenses for
package travel or hotel stay or boarding or lodging or any
other expenditure of similar nature or in relation
thereto. [Clause (ii) of Explanation to section 206C(1G)]
(ii) Buyer For section 206C(1H):
A person who purchases any goods but does not
include –
(A) the Central Government, a State Government, an
embassy, a High Commission, legation,
commission, consulate and the trade
representation of a foreign State, or
(B) a local authority7; or
(C) a person importing goods into India or any other
person as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify for
this purpose, subject to stipulated conditions.
For section 206C(1):
A person who obtains in any sale, by way of auction,
tender, or any other mode, goods of the nature
specified in the Table in point (1) or the right to
receive any such goods but does not include –
(A) a public sector company, the Central
Government, a State Government, and an
embassy, a high commission, legation,
commission, consulate and the trade
representation, of a foreign State and a club, or
(B) a buyer in the retail sale of such goods
purchased by him for personal consumption
[Explanation to section 206C]
For section 206C(1F):
A person who obtains in any sale, goods of the nature
specified therein, but does not include –
(A) the Central Government, a State Government
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9 5
a
and an embassy, a High Commission, legation,
commission, consulate and the trade
representation of a foreign State; or
(B) a local authority; or
(C) a public sector company which is engaged in the
business of carrying passengers. [Explanation to
section 206C]
(iii) Seller For section 206C(1H):
A person whose total sales, gross receipts or turnover
from the business carried on by him exceed ` 10
crores during the financial year immediately preceding
the financial year in which sale of goods is carried out.
However, seller does not include a person as notified
by the Central Government for this purpose, subject to
fulfillment of the stipulated conditions [Clause (b) of
Explanation to section 206C(1H)]
For section 206C(1) and section 206C(1F):
(i) The Central Government,
(ii) a State Government or
(iii) any local authority or
(iv) corporation or
(v) authority established by or under a Central, State
or Provincial Act, or
(vi) any company or
(vii) firm or
(viii) co-operative society
Seller also includes an individual or a HUF whose total
sales, gross receipts or turnover from the business or
profession carried on by him exceed ` 1 crore in case
of business and ` 50 lakhs in case of profession during
the financial year immediately preceding the financial
year in which the goods of the nature specified in the
Table in point (1) are sold.
[Explanation to section 206C]
(iv) Scrap Waste and scrap from the manufacture or mechanical
working of materials which is definitely not usable as
such because of breakage, cutting up, wear and other
reasons. [Explanation to section 206C]
(3) Higher rate of TCS for non-furnishers of PAN [Section 206CC]
(i) The provisions of section 206CC require tax collection at the higher of
the following two rates, in case of failure by the person paying any
sum or amount on which tax is collectible at source (collectee) to
furnish PAN [PAN or Aadhaar number in case of section 206C(1H)] to
the person responsible for collecting tax at source (collector) –
(a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act
(b) at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s
206C(1H)]
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not
exceed 20%.
(ii) Tax would be collectible at the rates mentioned above also in case
where the person furnishes a declaration under section 206C(1A) but
does not provide his PAN.
(iii) Both the collectee and the collector have to compulsorily quote the
PAN of the collectee in all correspondence, bills, vouchers and other
documents exchanged between them.
(iv) If the PAN provided to the collector is invalid or it does not belong to
the collectee, it shall be deemed that the collectee has not furnished
his PAN to the collector. Accordingly, tax would be collectible at the
rate specified in (i) above.
(v) The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who
does not have a permanent establishment in India.
(4) Higher rate of TCS for non-filers of income-tax return [Section 206CCA]
(i) Section 206CCA requires tax to be collected at source under the
provisions of this Chapter on any sum or amount received by a person
from a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
(a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;
(b) at 5%
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not
exceed 20%.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9 7
a
(ii) In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the
specified person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA,
then, tax is required to be collected at higher of the two rates
provided in section 206CC and section 206CCA.
(iii) Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income
under section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted
at source and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in
the said previous year.
However, the specified person would not include -
- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in
India10; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for
the assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is
notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 46/2024
dated 27.5.2024, notified the RBI as a person to not include
in the definition of specified person.
(5) CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to
section 206C(1F)
These amendments in section 206C have given rise to certain issues relating
to the scope and applicability of the provisions. Accordingly, the CBDT has,
vide Circular No. 22/2016 dated 8.6.2016, clarified the following issues in
“Question & Answer (Q&A)” format.
Q.1 Whether TCS@1% is on sale of motor vehicle at retail level or also on
sale of motor vehicles by manufacturers to dealers/ distributors?
A. To bring high value transactions within the tax net, section 206C has
been amended to provide that the seller shall collect the tax @ 1%
“Permanent establishment” includes a fixed place of business through which the business of the
enterprise is wholly or partly carried on. This concept and related provisions will be dealt with at the Final
level.
from the purchaser on sale of motor vehicle of the value exceeding
` 10 lakhs. This is brought to cover all transactions of retail sales and
accordingly, it will not apply on sale of motor vehicles by
manufacturers to dealers/distributors.
Q.2 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable only to
luxury cars?
A. No, as per section 206C(1F), the seller shall collect tax@1% from the
purchaser on sale of any motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs.
Q.3 Whether TCS@1% is applicable in the case of sale to Government
Departments, Embassies, Consulates and United Nation
Institutions, of motor vehicle or any other goods or provision of
services?
A. Government, institutions notified under United Nations (Privileges and
Immunities) Act 1947, and Embassies, Consulates, High Commission,
Legation, Commission and trade representation of a foreign State shall
not be liable to levy of TCS@1% under section 206C(1F).
Q.4 Whether TCS is applicable on each sale of motor vehicle or on
aggregate value of sale during the year?
A. Tax is to be collected at source@1% on sale consideration of a motor
vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs. It is applicable to each sale and not to
aggregate value of sale made during the year.
Q.5 Whether TCS@1% on sale of motor vehicle is applicable in case of
an individual?
A. The definition of "Seller" as given in clause (c) of the Explanation
below sub-section (11) of section 206C shall be applicable in the case
of sale of motor vehicles also.
Q.6 How would the provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle be
applicable in a case where part of the payment is made in cash
and part is made by cheque?
A. The provisions of TCS on sale of motor vehicle exceeding ` 10 lakhs is
not dependent on mode of payment. Any sale of motor vehicle
exceeding ` 10 lakhs would attract TCS@1%.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.9 9
a
(6) CBDT Clarification relating to certain issues with respect to
section 206C(1H)
In exercise of the power to issue guidelines, the CBDT has, with the approval
of Central Government, vide Circular no. 17/2020 dated 29.9.2020, issued
the following guidelines for removing certain difficulties-
1. Applicability on sale of Motor vehicle:
The provisions of section 206C(1F) apply to sale of motor vehicle of
the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs. Section 206C(1H) excludes from its
applicability goods covered under section 206C(1F). It may be noted
that the scope of sections 206C(1H) and (1F) are different. While
section 206C(1F) is based on single sale of motor vehicle, section
206C(1H) is for receipt above ` 50 lakhs. Hence, in order to remove
difficulty that whether all motor vehicles are excluded from the
applicability of section 206C(1H), it is clarified that,-
- Receipt of sale consideration from a dealer would be subjected
to TCS under section 206C(1H), if such sales are not subjected to
TCS under section 206C(1F)
- In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale
of motor vehicle of the value of ` 10 lakhs or less to a buyer
would be subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H), if the receipt
of sale consideration for such vehicles during the previous year
exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the previous year.
- In case of sale to consumer, receipt of sale consideration for sale
of motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs would not be
subjected to TCS under section 206C(1H) if such sales are
subjected to TCS under section 206C(1F).
2. Adjustment for sale return, discount or indirect taxes:
It is been clarified that no adjustment on account of sale return or
discount or indirect taxes including GST is required to be made for
collection of tax under section 206C(1H) since the collection is made
with reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.
Note – It can be inferred that no adjustment for GST is required to be
made under section 206C(1F) also, since collection is made with
reference to receipt of amount of sale consideration.
ILLUSTRATION 13
Mr. Gupta, a resident Indian, is in retail business and his turnover for F.Y.2023-24
was ` 12 crores. He regularly purchases goods from another resident, Mr. Agarwal,
a wholesaler, and the aggregate payments during the F.Y.2024-25 was ` 95 lakh
(` 20 lakh on 1.6.2024, ` 25 lakh on 12.8.2024, ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2024 and ` 28
lakh on 25.3.2025). Assume that the said amounts were credited to Mr. Agarwal’s
account in the books of Mr. Gupta on the same date. Mr. Agarwal’s turnover for
F.Y.2023-24 was ` 15 crores.
(1) Based on the above facts, examine the TDS/TCS implications, if any, under the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
(2) Would your answer be different if Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2023-24 was
` 8 crores, all other facts remaining the same?
(3) Would your answer to (1) and (2) change, if PAN has not been furnished by
the buyer or seller, as required?
SOLUTION
(1) Since Mr. Gupta’s turnover for F.Y.2023-24 exceeds 10 crores, and payments
made by him to Mr. Agarwal, a resident seller exceed ` 50 lakhs in the
P.Y.2024-25, he is liable to deduct tax@0.1% of ` 45 lakhs (being the sum
exceeding ` 50 lakhs) in the following manner –
No tax is to be deducted u/s 194Q on the payments made on 1.6.2024 and
12.8.2024, since the aggregate payments till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not
exceeded the threshold of ` 50 lakhs.
Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
the payment/ credit of ` 22 lakh on 23.11.2024 [` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being
the balance unexhausted threshold limit].
Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be deducted u/s 194Q from
the payment/ credit of ` 28 lakhs on 25.3.2025.
Note – In this case, since both section 194Q and 206C(1H) applies, tax has to
be deducted u/s 194Q.
(2) If Mr. Gupta’s turnover for the F.Y.2023-24 was only ` 8 crores, TDS
provisions under section 194Q would not be attracted. However, TCS
provisions under section 206C(1H) would be attracted in the hands of
Mr. Agarwal, since his turnover exceeds ` 10 crores in the F.Y.2023-24 and
his receipts from Mr. Gupta exceed ` 50 lakhs.
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.10 1
a
No tax is to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on 1.6.2024 and 12.8.2024, since the
aggregate receipts till that date i.e. 45 lakhs, has not exceeded the threshold
of ` 50 lakhs.
Tax of ` 1,700 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 17 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on
23.11.2024 (` 22 lakh – ` 5 lakhs, being the balance unexhausted threshold limit).
Tax of ` 2,800 (i.e., 0.1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be collected u/s 206C(1H) on
25.3.2025.
(3) In case (1), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Agarwal to Mr. Gupta, then,
Mr. Gupta has to deduct tax@5%, instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of
` 85,000 (i.e., 5% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 1,40,000 (5% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be
deducted by Mr. Gupta u/s 194Q on 23.11.2024 and 25.3.2025, respectively.
In case (2), if PAN is not furnished by Mr. Gupta to Mr. Agarwal, then,
Mr. Agarwal has to collect tax@1% instead of 0.1%. Accordingly, tax of
` 17,000 (i.e., 1% of ` 17 lakhs) and ` 28,000 (1% of ` 28 lakhs) has to be
collected by Mr. Agarwal u/s 206C(1H) on 23.11.2024 and 25.3.2025,
respectively.
s/u
SDT
.v
)H1(/)F1(/)1(C602
s/u
SCT
-
weivrevO
Q491
)H1(C602
)F1(C602
)1(C602
sralucitraP
SDT
SCT
SCT
SCT
fo
emit
eht
tA
tpiecer
fo
emit
eht
tA
tpiecer
fo
emit
eht
tA
tibed
fo
emit
eht
tA
emit
fo
tnioP
.1
,tiderc
ro
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
reilrae
si
revehcihw
si
revehcihw
,tpiecer reilrae
fo
eulav
eht
fo
%1.0
elas
eht
fo
%1.0
noitaredisnoc
elas
fo
%1
rof
setar
tnereffiD
sa
,SCT/SDT
fo
%
.2
sesahcrup
gnideecxe
noitaredisnoc
eeS(
sdoog
tnereffid
eb
yam
esac
eht
`
gnideecxe
reyub
a
morf
shkal
`
)woleb
relles
a
morf
shkal
revonrut
s’reyuB
dluohs
revonrut
s’relleS
,ytirohtuA
lacoL
,.tvoG
etatS
,.tvoG
lartneC
relleS
.3
`
deecxe
dluohs
eht
ni
erorc
`
deecxe
,noitaroproc
,mrif
,yteicos
po-oC
,ynapmoC
])H1(/)F1(/)1(C602[
eht
ni
erorc
42-3202.Y.F
42-3202.Y.F
ni
revonrut
esohw
FUH/laudividnI
)Q491(
reyuB
201.9
42-3202.Y.F
)noisseforp(
hkal
`
/)ssenisub(
erorc
`
>
morf
snoisulcxE
.4
fo
noitinifed
eht
reyub
,etalusnoc
,noitagel
,noissimmoc
hgiH
,yssabme
,tvoG
etatS
,tvoG
lartneC
nommoC
etats
ngierof
a
fo
.per
edart
,noissimmoc
morf
snoisulcxE
)H1(/)F1(/)1(C602
,ytirohtua
lacoL
,ytirohtua
lacoL
a
,.oC
rotces
cilbuP
snoisulcxe
cificepS
gnitropmi
snosreP
.oc
rotces
cilbuP
dna
bulc
ro
aidnI
otni
sdoog
ssenisub
eht
ni
degagne
fo
elas
liater
ni
reyuB
snosrep
deifiton
rehto
sregnessap
gniyrrac
fo
rof
desahcrup
sdoog
lanosrep
noitpmusnoc
7.102(cid:0)(cid:3) INCOME TAX LAW
Q491
)F1(C602
)1(C602
sdooG
SCT
SDT
SCT
SCT %1
namuh
rof
rouqil
cilohoclA
noitpmusnoc
%5
sevael
udneT
%5.2
tserof
rednu
deniatbo
rebmiT
esael
%5.2
rehto
yna
yb
deniatbo
rebmiT
edom
%5.2
ton
ecudorp
tserof
rehto
ynA
sevael
udnet
ro
rebmit
gnieb
%1
parcS
%1
etingil
ro
laoc
gnieb
,slareniM
ero
nori
ro
liN
reyub
fo
revonrut
fi
,seY
.A.N
eutriv
yb
,liN
rof
desu
era
)7(
ot
)1(
smeti
fI
eht
ni
erorc
`
sdeecxe
noitces
fo
ro
gnissecorp
,gnirutcafunam
fo
eulav
dna
42-3202.Y.F
)A1(C602
ro
sgniht
ro
selcitra
gnicudorp
ni
relles
morf
sesahcrup
dna
yticirtcele
fo
noitareneg
`
sdeecxe
52-4202.Y.F
sesoprup
gnidart
rof
ton
shkal
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 03
a
Q491
)F1(C602
)1(C602
sdooG
SCT
SDT
SCT
SCT
-
-
elas
fo
%1
-
eulav
fo
elciheV
rotoM
fo
elaS
noitaredisnoc
shkal
`
gnideecxe
deriuqer
si
relaed
fi
,oN
relaed
fo
revonrut
fi
,seY
-
-
eulav
fo
elciheV
rotoM
fo
elaS
.ecruos
ta
xat
tcuded
ot
eht
ni
erorc
`
sdeecxe
yb
shkal
`
gnideecxe
fo
eulav
dna
42-3202.Y.F
/srelaed
ot
rerutcafunam
ton
si
relaed
fi
,seY
desahcrup
selcihev
rotom
sretubirtsid
xat
tcuded
ot
deriuqer
eht
ni
rerutcafunam
morf
dna
ecruos
ta
`
sdeecxe
52-4202.Y.F
s’rerutcafunam
.shkal
`
sdeecxe
revonrut
42-3202.Y.F
eht
ni
erorc
rotom
fo
eulav
dna
relaed
ot
dlos
selcihev
sdeecxe
52-4202.Y.F
ni
shkal
`
-
-
-
-
eulav
fo
elciheV
rotoM
fo
elaS
dna
shkal
`
gnideecxe
ton
rotom
lla
fo
eulav
etagergga
ot
relles
eht
yb
dlos
selcihev
eht
ni
shkal
`
≤
reyub
eht
52-4202.Y.F
7.104(cid:0)(cid:3) INCOME TAX LAW
Q491
)F1(C602
)1(C602
sdooG
SCT
SDT
SCT
SCT
deriuqer
si reyub
fi
,oN
reyub
fo
revonrut
fi
,seY
-
-
eulav
fo
elciheV
rotoM
fo
elaS
.ecruos
ta
xat
tcuded
ot
eht
ni
erorc
`
sdeecxe
tub
shkal
`
gnideecxe
ton
.42-3202.Y.F
rotom
lla
fo
eulav
etagergga
ton
si
reyub
fi
,seY
ot
relles
eht
yb
dlos
selcihev
SDT
tcuded
ot
deriuqer
eht
ni
shkal
` >
reyub
eht
revonrut
s’relles
dna
52-4202.Y.F
ni
erorc
`
sdeecxe
42-3202.Y.F
eht
naht
rehto
sdoog
fo
elaS
11
ot
ni denoitnem
-
-
-
-
sdoog
fo
eulav
etagergga
fI
`
si
reyub
ot
relles
yb
dlos
ssel
ro
shkal
deriuqer
si reyub
fi
,oN
reyub
fo
revonrut
fi
,seY
-
-
sdoog
fo
eulav
etagergga
fI
.ecruos
ta
xat
tcuded
ot
eht
ni
erorc
`
sdeecxe
si
reyub
ot
relles
eht
yb
dlos
.42-3202.Y.F
shkal
`
naht
erom
ton
si
reyub
fi
,seY
SDT
tcuded
ot
deriuqer
revonrut
s’relles
dna
sdeecxe
eht
ni
erorc
`
42-3202.Y.F
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 05
a
7.106
(7) Furnishing of copy of declaration within specified time
[Section 206C(1B)]
The person responsible for collecting tax under this section shall deliver or
cause to be delivered to the Principal Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner or Principal Commissioner or Commissioner one copy of the
declaration referred to in sub-section (1A) on or before 7th of the month
next following the month in which the declaration is furnished to him.
(8) TCS to be paid within prescribed time [Section 206C(3)]
Any amount collected under this section shall be paid within the prescribed
time to the credit of the Central Government or as the Board directs.
Time limit for paying tax collected to the credit of the Central
Government [Rule 37CA]
Person Period within which 9.106
collecting sums such sum should be
Circumstance
in accordance paid to the credit of
with section the Central
206C Government
(1) An office of the (i) where the tax is on the same day
Government paid without
production of an
income-tax
challan
(ii) where tax is paid on or before 7 days
accompanied by from the end of the
an income-tax month in which the
challan collection is made
(2) Collectors other within one week from
than an office of the last day of the
the Government month in which the
collection is made
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.10 7
a
(9) Main differences between TDS and TCS
TDS TCS
(1) TDS is tax deduction at TCS is tax collection at source.
source
(2) Person responsible for (i) Seller of certain goods is
paying is required to deduct responsible for collecting tax at
tax at source at the source at the prescribed rate
prescribed rate. from the buyer.
(ii) Person who grants licence or
lease (in respect of any parking
lot, toll plaza, mine or quarry)
is responsible for collecting tax
at source at the prescribed rate
from the licensee or lessee, as
the case may be.
(iii) Authorised dealer receiving
amount for remittance under
the LRS of the RBI or seller of
an overseas tour program
package is responsible for
collecting tax at source at the
prescribed rate from the
buyer.
(3) Generally, tax is required to Generally, tax is required to be
be deducted at the time of collected at source at the time of
credit to the account of the debiting of the amount payable by
payee or at the time of the buyer of certain goods to the
payment, whichever is account of the buyer or at the
earlier. time of receipt of such amount
from the said buyer, whichever is
However, in case of payment
earlier.
of salary, payment in respect
of life insurance policy etc. However, in case of sale of motor
tax is required to be vehicle of the value exceeding
deducted at the time of ` 10 lakhs and sale of goods
payment. exceeding ` 50 lakhs other than
exported goods and goods
mentioned in section 206C(1), tax
collection at source u/s 206C(1F)
and 206C(1H), respectively, is
required at the time of receipt of
sale consideration.
Note – TCS will be dealt with in detail at the Final level.
(10) Common number for TDS and TCS [Section 203A]
(i) Persons responsible for deducting tax or collecting tax at source
should apply to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a “tax-
deduction and collection-account number”.
(ii) Section 203A(2) enlists the documents/certificates/returns/challans in
which the “tax deduction account number” or “tax collection account
number” or “tax deduction and collection account number” has to be
compulsorily quoted.
(iii) The requirement of obtaining and quoting of TAN under section 203A
shall not apply to such person, as may be notified by the Central
Government in this behalf.
ETALUTIPACER
SU
TEL
ecruos
ta
noitcuded
xaT
.I
noitcuded
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
etar
egarevA
laudividnI
nosrep
ynA
noitpmexe
cisaB
yralaS
xat-emocni
fo
)eeyolpmE(
rof
elbisnopser
timil
emocni
yna
gniyap
erac
nekat
si
sihT
eht
rednu
elbaegrahc
noitatupmoc
ni
fo
seiralaS“
daeh
egareva
eht
fo
-emocni
fo
etar .xat
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
no
%01
laudividnI
FPE
eht
fo
seetsurT
ro
tnemyaP
erutamerP
A291
erutamerp
)eeyolpmE(
yna
ro
emehcS
etagergga
morf
lawardhtiw
elbaxat
nosrep
desirohtua
≥
tnemyap
’seeyolpmE
lawardhtiw
emehcS
eht
rednu
000,05
`
dnuF
tnedivorP
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
%01
tnediser
ynA
nosrep
ynA
a
ni
000,01
`
>
no
tseretnI
eht
ot
emocni
hcus
rof
elbisnopser
fo
esac
ni
,.Y.F
seitiruceS
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
yb
emocni
yna
gniyap
%8
no
tseretni
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
no
tseretni
fo
yaw
)elbaxaT(
sgnivaS
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
seitiruces
,sdnoB
.reilrae
%57.7/3002
)elbaxaT(
sgnivaS
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 09
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta xat
.8102
,sdnoB
morf
tceffe
htiW
,4202.01.10
etaR
gnitaolF
,sdnoB
sgnivaS
ro
)elbaxat(
deifiton
rehto
yna
lartneC
fo
ytiruces
ro
tnemnrevoG
tnemnrevoG
etatS
eb
osla
llahs
eht
rof
dedulcni
xat
fo
esoprup
s/u
noitcuded
tseretni
hcus
fi
>
elbayap
gnirud
000,01
`
.Y.F
eht
,.Y.F
a
ni 000,5
`
>
tseretni
fo
esac
ni
serutnebed
no
ni
.oC
a yb
deussi
cilbup
eht
hcihw
yllaitnatsbus
era
7.110(cid:0)(cid:3) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
ro
diap
,detseretni
a
ot
detiderc
laudividni
tnediser
c/A
na
yb
FUH
ro
euqehc
eeyap
dlohserht
oN
>
yna
ni
deificeps
.esac
rehto
yna
gnikam
erofeB
%01
tnediseR
reciffO
lapicnirP
ehT
ro
tnuomA
dnediviD
edom
yna
yb
tnemyap
redloherahs
citsemod
a
fo
tnuoma
etagergga
gnidulcni(
yna
fo
tcepser
ni
ynapmoc
ni
,.Y.F
a
ni
000,5
`>
no
sdnedivid
erofeb
ro
dnedivid
dnedivid
fo
esac
ecnereferp
yna
gnikam
ot
detiderc
ro
diap
)serahs
ro
noitubirtsid
laudividni
na
.dnedivid
fo
tnemyap
yna
yb
redloherahs
naht
rehto
edom
hsac
ni
dlohserht
oN
>
sesac
rehto
hcus
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
%01
tnediseR
ynA
rehto(
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
rehto
tseretnI
A491
tnuocca
eht
ot
emocni
ro
laudividni
na
naht
etagergga
tseretni
naht
eht
ta
ro
eeyap
eht
fo
latot
esohw
FUH
>
tnuoma
seitiruces
no
,tnemyap
fo
emit
stpiecer
ssorg
,selas
,.Y.F
a
ni
000,04
`
.reilrae
si
revehcihw
morf
revonrut
ro
tseretni
fo
esac
ni
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 11
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
ro
ssenisub
diap
ro
detiderc
ton
od
noisseforp
– yb
ni
erorc
`
deecxe
gniknab
a
)i(
ro
ssenisub
fo
esac
;ynapmoc
fo
esac
ni
shkal
`
evitarepo-oc
a )ii(
eht
gnirud
noisseforp
degagne
yteicos
yletaidemmi
gniknab
ni
).Y.F
gnidecerp
dna
;ssenisub
rof
elbisnopser
eciffo
tsop
a
)iii(
rehto
tseretni
gniyap
tisoped
yna
no
no
tseretni
naht
deifiton
a
rednu
.seitiruces
.emehcS
evoba
eht
lla
nI
a
si
eeyap
fi
,sesac
roines
tnediser
xat
,nezitic
si
timil
noitcuded
.000,05
` >
,.Y.F
a
ni
000,5
` >
.sesac
rehto
ni
7.112 INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
%03
nosreP
ynA
nosrep
ehT
eht
ro
tnuomA
morf
sgninniW
B491
rof
elbisnopser
fo
etagergga
,yrettol
yna
yb
emocni
gniyap
>
stnuoma
drowssorc
sgninniw
hcus
fo
yaw
.Y.F
a
ni
000,01
`
drac
ro
elzzup
rehto
ro
emag
yna
fo
emag
morf
ro
tros
ro
gnilbmag
yna
fo
gnitteb
erutan
ro
mrof
.Y.F
eht
fo
dne
eht
tA
%03
nosrep
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ten
eht
nO
morf
sgninniW
AB491
si
ereht
esac
nI
rof
elbisnopser
a
ni
sgninniw
semag
enilno
resu
morf
lawardhtiw
yb
emocni
gniyap
resu
s’nosrep
,.Y.F
eht
gnirud
tnuocca
sgninniw
hcus
fo
yaw
sa
tnuocca
detcuded
eb
dluow
xat
enilno
yna
morf
ni
detupmoc
hcus
fo
emit
eht
ta
.emag
debircserp
ten
no
lawardhtiw
.rennam
ni
desirpmoc
sgninniw
nI
.lawardhtiw
hcus
dluow
xat
,noitidda
no
detcuded
eb
osla
tnuoma
gniniamer
eht
eht
ni
sgninniw
ten
fo
sa
tnuocca
resu
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 13
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
ni
detupmoc
ta
rennam
debircserp
.Y.F
eht
fo
dne
eht
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
%03
nosreP
ynA
a
ro
rekaM
kooB
eht
ro
tnuomA
morf
sgninniW
BB491
gnidloh
nosrep
fo
etagergga
ecar
esroh
esroh
rof
ecneci
l
>
stnuoma
rof
ro
gnicar
.Y.F
a ni
000,01
`
rof
gnignarra
gnitteb
ro
gniregaw
.esruoc
ecar
yna
ni
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
mus
fo
%1
tnediseR
ynA
,.tvoG
etatS/lartneC
mus
elgniS
ot
stnemyaP
C491
eht
ot
mus
hcus
ro
diap
rof
rotcartnoc
,ytirohtua
lacoL
>
diap
ro
detiderc
srotcartnoC
eht
fo
tnuocca
eht
fi
,detiderc
tuo
gniyrrac
/etatS/lartneC
000,03
`
eht
ta
ro
rotcartnoc
na
si
eeyap
krow
yna
,.nproC
laicnivorP
)ro(
,tnemyap
fo
emit
ro
laudividnI
gnidulcni(
,tsurt
,mrif
,ynapmoc
fo
etagergga
ehT
.reilrae
si
revehcihw
FUH
fo
ylppus-oc
,yteicos
deretsiger
ro
detiderc
smus
mus
fo
%2
)ruobal
,yteicos
evitarepo
a
ot
diap
dehsilbatse
ytisrevinu
gnirud
rotcartnoc
ro
diap
/etatS/lartneC
rednu
>
.Y.F
eht
eht
fi
,detiderc
,tcA
laicnivorP
000,00,1
`
yna
si
eeyap
ytisrevinu
deralced
FUH/laudividnI
.nosrep
rehto
,tcA
CGU
eht
rednu
tcuded
ton
deen
etatS
ngieroF
fo
.tvoG
si
mus
erehw
xat
ngierof
a
ro
diap
ro
detiderc
7.114 INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
/laudividni
,esirpretne
rof
ylevisulcxe
latot
esohw
FUH
sesoprup
lanosrep
stpiecer
ssorg
,selas
morf
revonrut
ro
ro
ssenisub
sdeecxe
noisseforp
fo
esac
ni
erorc
`
shkal
`
ro
ssenisub
noisseforp
fo
esac
ni
eht
gnirud
yletaidemmi
.Y.F
gnidecerp
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
eht
fi
,%5
tnediseR
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
ecnarusnI
D491
eht
ot
emocni
hcus
a
si
eeyap
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
noissimmoC
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
etaroproc-non
yb
emocni
yna
gniyap
>
tnuoma
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
tnediser
noitarenumer
fo
yaw
.Y.F
a
ni
000,51
`
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
eht
fi
,%01
rof
drawer
ro
.reilrae
a
si
eeyap
ro
gniticilos
citsemod
ecnarusni
gnirucorp
ynapmoc
ssenisub
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
eht
fo
%5
tnediser
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
mus
ynA
AD491
fo
tnuoma
rof
elbisnopser
tnuoma
etagergga
efiL
a
rednu
emocni
mus
yna
gniyap
a
ni
000,00,1
`
≥
ecnarusnI
desirpmoc
gnidulcni
,PIL
a
rednu
raey
laicnanif
ton
yciloP
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 15
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
.niereht
yb
detacolla
mus
eht
eht
gnillifluf
.f.e.W
sunob
fo
yaw
snoitidnoc
,4202.01.1
s/u
deificeps
si
xat
fo
etar
)D01(01
.%2
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
llit
%5
nosrep
ynA
nosrep
ynA
a
ni
000,51
`
>
noissimmoC
G491
eht
ot
emocni
hcus
.4202.90.03
,gnikcots
rof
elbisnopser
raey
laicnanif
fo
elas
no
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
retfaerehT
,gnitubirtsid
yb
emocni
yna
gniyap
stekcit
yrettol
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
.%2
ro
gnisahcrup
,noissimmoc
fo
yaw
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
yrettol
gnilles
ezirp
ro
noitarenumer
.reilrae
stekcit
eman
revetahw
yb(
yrettol
no
)dellac stekcit
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
llit
%5
tnediser
ynA
rehto(
nosrep
ynA
a
ni
000,51
`
>
ro
noissimmoC
H491
eht
ot
emocni
hcus
.4202.90.03
ro
laudividnI
na
naht
raey
laicnanif
egarekorb
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
retfaerehT
latot
esohw
FUH
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
.%2
stpiecer
ssorg
,selas
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
morf
revonrut
ro
.reilrae
ro
ssenisub
ton
od
noisseforp
ni
erorc
`
deecxe
ro
ssenisub
fo
esac
fo
esac
ni
shkal
`
eht
gnirud
noisseforp
7.116(cid:0)(cid:3) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
yletaidemmi
).Y.F
gnidecerp
rof
elbisnopser
noissimmoc
gniyap
.egarekorb
ro
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
ro
M
&
P
roF
tnediser
ynA
rehto(
nosrep
ynA
a
ni
000,04,2
`
>
tneR
I-491
eht
ot
emocni
hcus
-tnempiuqe
ro
laudividni
na
naht
raey
laicnanif
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
%2
latot
esohw
FUH
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
stpiecer
ssorg
,selas
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
morf
revonrut
ro
ro
dnal
roF
.reilrae
ro
ssenisub
dnal
,gnidliub
no
deirrac
noisseforp
tnanetruppa
deecxe
ton
od
mih
yb
,gnidliub
a
ot
fo
esac
ni
erorc
`
ro
erutinruf
ro
ssenisub
%01-
sgnittif
fo
esac
ni
shkal
`
eht
gnirud
noisseforp
yletaidemmi
).Y.F
gnidecerp
rof
elbisnopser .tner
gniyap
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
fo
%1
tnediseR
a
gnieb
,nosrep
ynA
hkal
`
≥
no
tnemyaP
AI-491
eht
ot
mus
hcus
noitaredisnoc
rorefsnart
naht
rehto(
eerefsnart
noitaredisnoC(
fo
refsnart
eht
fo
tnuocca
ro
refsnart
rof
ot
derrefer
nosrep
a
ro
refsnart
rof
niatrec
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 17
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
eht
ta
ro
rorefsnart
ytud
pmats
AL491
noitces
ni
ytud
pmats
elbavommi
,tnemyap
fo
emit
,eulav
rof
elbisnopser
)eulav
rehto
ytreporp
.reilrae
si
revehcihw
si
revehcihw
noitasnepmoc
gniyap
naht
rehgih
yroslupmoc
rof
larutlucirga
fo
noitisiuqca
dnal
ytreporp
elbavommi
larur
naht
rehto
)dnal
larutlucirga
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
llit
%5
tnediseR
ynA
FUH
/laudividnI
a
rof
000,05
`
>
fo
tnemyaP
BI-491
htnom
tsal
eht
rof
,tner
.4202.90.03
naht
rehto(
a
fo
trap
ro
htnom
niatrec
yb
tner
ro
raey
suoiverp
eht
fo
retfaerehT
esohw
FUH/laudividnI
htnom
ro
slaudividni
fo
htnom
tsal
eht
.%2
ssorg
,selas
latot
FUH
ytreporp
eht
fi
,ycnanet
revonrut
ro
stpiecer
eht
gnirud
detacav
si
ro
ssenisub
morf
yam
esac
eht
sa
,raey
no
deirrac
noisseforp
fo
tnuocca
eht
ot
,eb
`
sdeecxe
mih
yb
eht
ta
ro
eeyap
eht
fo
esac
ni
erorc
,tnemyap
fo
emit
ro
ssenisub
reilrae
si
revehcihw
fo
esac
ni
shkal
`
eht
gnirud
noisseforp yletaidemmi
).Y.F
gnidecerp
rof
elbisnopser .tner
gniyap
7.118(cid:0) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
eeyaP
-
%2
tnediseR
ynA
rehto
,nosrep
ynA
a
ni
000,03
`
>
rof
seeF
J491
eht
ot
mus
hcus
ylno
degagne
ro
laudividni
na
naht
rof
,raey
laicnanif
ro
lanoisseforp
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
eht
ni
;FUH
fo
yrogetac
hcae
lacinhcet
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
fo
ssenisub
fo
esac
ni
,revewoH
,revewoH(
.emocni
/secivres
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
fo
noitarepo
lanoisseforp
rof
seef
ton
seod
timil
siht-noN
/ytlayoR
.reilrae
ertnec
llac
secivres
lacinhcet
ro
fo
esac
ni
ylppa
/seef
etepmoc
esac
nI
-
%2
,detiderc
ro
diap
ot
edam
tnemyap
s’rotceriD
rof
seef
fo
,FUH/laudividni
a
fo
rotcerid
noitarenumer
lacinhcet
,selas
latot
esohw
.)ynapmoc
ro
secivres
ro
stpiecer
ssorg
erehw
,ytlayor
morf
revonrut
si
ytlayor
hcus
ro
ssenisub
erutan
eht
ni
sdeecxe
noisseforp
-redisnoc
fo
fo
esac
ni
erorc
`
,elas
rof
noita
shkal
` ro
ssenisub
ro
noitubirtsid
noisseforp
fo
esac
ni
fo
noitibihxe
eht
gnirud
-otamenic
yletaidemmi
smlif
cihparg
si
,.Y.F
gnidecerp
rehtO
- %01
xat
tcuded
ot
elbail
stnemyap
tpecxe
,J491
s/u
rof
seef
erehw
secivres
lanoisseforp
diap
ro
detiderc
si
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 19
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
sih
rof
ylevisulcxe
.sesoprup
lanosrep
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
%01
tnediser
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
no
emocnI
K491
eht
ot
mus
hcus
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
rehto
stinu
eeyap
eht
fo
tnuocca
ni
emocni
yna
gniyap
000,5
`
>
tnuoma
eht
ni
naht
fo
emit
eht
ta
ro
a
fo
stinu
fo
tcepser
.Y.F
a
ni
fo
erutan
si
revehcihw
,tnemyap
lautum
sniag
latipac
.reilrae
fo
rotartsinimdA/dnuf
deificeps
eht
/gnikatrednu
ynapmoc
deificeps
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
%01
tnediseR
ynA
nosrep
ynA
ro
tnuomA
noitasnepmoC
AL491
rof
elbisnopser
etagergga
noitisiuqca
no
ni
mus
yna
gniyap
>
tnuoma
niatrec
fo
fo
erutan
eht
.Y.F
a
ni
000,05,2
`
elbavommi
ro
noitasnepmoc
rehto
ytreporp
decnahne
naht
no
noitasnepmoc
larutlucirga
yroslupmoc
detautis
dnal
fo
noitisiuqca
aidnI
ni
ytreporp
elbavommi
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
llit
%5
tnediseR
ynA
FUH
ro
laudividnI
a
ni
000,00,05
`
>
ot
stnemyaP
-
M491
eht
ta
ro
mus
hcus
.4202.90.03
ohw
esoht
naht
rehto
raey
laicnanif
srotcartnoC
7.120(cid:0) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
,tnemyap
fo
emit
retfaerehT
ot
deriuqer
era
noissimmoC
-
.reilrae
si
revehcihw
.%2
ecruos
ta
xat
tcuded
egarekorb
ro
C491
noitces
rednu
rof
seeF
-
J491
ro
H491
ro
lanoisseforp
secivres
tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
tA
hcus
fo
%2@
nosrep
ynA
ynapmoc
gniknab
a
-
eht
fi
erorc
`
>
hsaC
N491
mus
hcus
fo
mus
ro
knab
yna
ro
-oc
a
si
tneipicer
slawardhtiw
eht
esac
nI
noitutitsni
gniknab
yteicos
evitarepo
sah
tneipicer
evitarepo-oc
a
-
esac
ni
erorc
`
>
IOR
delif
ton
ni
degagne
yteicos
srehto
fo
eht
lla
rof
eht
no
gniyrrac
yletaidemmi
gniknab
fo
ssenisub
gnidecerp
ro
rof
,s.Y.P
eciffo
tsop
a
-
emit
hcihw
rof
elbisnopser
si
ohw
s/u
timil
,mus
yna
gniyap
sah
)1(931
ro
tnuoma
eht
gnieb
hcus
,deripxe
fo
etagergga
eht
eb
llahs
mus
esac
eht
sa
,stnuoma
ro
tma
eht
hsac
ni
,eb
yam
,stma
fo
.gga
/erorc
`
gnideecxe
`
>
hsac
ni
eht
esac
ni
erorc
`
gnirud
hkal
a
si
tneipicer
.Y.P
eht
,yteicos
evitarepooc
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 21
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
SDT
suoiverp
eht
gnirud
eht
fo
%2@
-
nosrep
yna
ot
,raey
erehw
,mus
erom
ro
eno
morf
hsac
deniatniam
stnuocca
>
lawardhtiw
tneipicer
eht
yb
tub
shkal
`
/erorc
`
≤
ni
erorc
`
eht
esac
a
si
tneipicer
evitarepo-oc
yteicos
eht
fo
%5@
-
erehw
,mus
lawardhtiw
hsac
/erorc
`
>
esac
ni erorc
`
si
tneipicer
eht
evitarepo-oc
a
yteicos
,ecrof
ni
setaR
deificepS
deificeps
deifitoN
noitpmexe
cisaB
gnola(
noisneP
P491
eht
erehw
nezitic
roines
knab
timil
tseretni
htiw
sah
laudividni
nA
,.e.i
ni(
000,00,3
`[
knab
no
eht
desicrexe
,laudividni
deificeps
esac
)tnuocca
7.122(cid:0) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta xat
fo
noitpo
a
gnieb
syap
nezitic
roines
fo
tuo
gnitfihs
ni
tnediser
tluafed
rednu
xat
xat
tluafed
eht
ohw
,aidnI
s/u
emiger
xat
.emiger
eht
fo
si
-
,)CAB511
fo
ega
/
000,00,3
`
erom
ro
sraey
eht
sa
,000,00,5
`
setaR
emit
yna
ta
fi
,eb
yam
esac
ni
deificeps
;YP
eht
gnirud
roines
deificeps
noitces
,CAB511
gnivah
si
-
sah
nezitic
eht
erehw
noisnep
eht
desicrexe
laudividni
dna
emocni
gnitfihs
fo noitpo
xat
syap
rehto
on
tluafed
eht fo
tuo
eht
rednu
tpecxe
emocni
emiger
xat
xat
tluafed
tseretni
s/u
gnidivorp
.emiger
emocni
latot
,.e.i[
]CAB511
ro
deviecer
retfa
emocni
elbaviecer
ot
tceffe
gnivig
yna
morf
noitcuded
eht
tnuocca
rednu
elbawolla
yb
deniatniam
fi
,A-IV
retpahC
hcus
elbawolla
yna
ni
laudividni
eht
deecxe
dluohs
emas
eht
noitpmexe
cisab
knab
deificeps
ni
,rehtruF
.timil
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 23
a
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
si
eh
hcihw
ni
eht
esac
sih
gniviecer
si
laudividni
noisnep
etaber
ot
deltitne
dna
;emocni
xat
morf
A78
s/u
sah
-
eht
neht
,elbayap
a
dehsinruf
eb
dluohs
emas
ot
noitaralced
]ot
tceffe
nevig
deificeps
eht
.knab
fo
tiderc
fo
emit
eht
tA
mus
fo
%1.0
tnediser
ynA
si
ohw
,reyuB
a
ni
shkal
`
>
fo
esahcruP
Q491
eht
ot
mus
hcus
gnideecxe
rof
elbisnopser
raey
suoiverp
sdoog
ro
relles
eht
fo
tnuocca
shkal
`
ot
mus
yna
gniyap
,tnemyap
fo
emit
eht
ta
rof
tnediser
yna
.reilrae
si revehcihw
.sdoog
fo
esahcrup
nosrep
a
snaem
reyuB
,selas
latot
esohw
ro
stpiecer
ssorg
ssenisub
morf
revonrut
serorc
`
sdeecxe
YF
eht
gnirud
gnidecerp
yletaidemmi
eht
hcihw
ni
YF
eht
si
sdoog
fo
esahcrup
.tuo
deirrac
7.124(cid:0) INCOME TAX LAW
fo
emiT
SDT
fo
etaR
eeyaP
reyaP
timiL
dlohserhT
fo
erutaN
noitceS
fo
noitcuded
rof
tnemyap
ecruos
ta
xat
hcus
gnidivorp
erofeB
eulav
fo
%01
tnediser
ynA
rehto(
nosrep
ynA
ro
eulaV
ro
tifeneb
ynA
R491
etisiuqrep
ro
tifeneb
fo
.ergga
ro
ro
laudividni
na
naht
fo
etagergga
,etisiuqrep
hcus
fo
eulav
latot
esohw
FUH
ro
tifeneb
fo
eulav
rehtehw
ro
tifeneb
stpiecer
ssorg
,selas
>
etisiuqrep
elbitrevnoc
etisiuqrep
ton
od
revonrut
ro
a
ni
000,02
`
ro
yenom
otni
ni
erorc
`
deecxe
raey
laicnanif
gnisira
,ton
ro
ssenisub
fo
esac
ssenisub
morf
fo
esac
ni
shkal
`
esicrexe
eht
ro
eht
gnirud
noisseforp
noisseforp
a
fo
yletaidemmi
snoisivorp
ehT
).Y.F
gnidecerp
ot
ylppa
dluow
rof
elbisnopser
ro
tifeneb
yna
a
ot
gnidivorp
,etisiuqrep
tifeneb
yna
,tnediser
ni
rehtehw
.etisiuqrep
ro
dnik
ni
ro
hsac
,ynapmoc
a
fo
esac
nI
ni
yltrap
ro
elbisnopser
nosrep“
dna
hsac
snaem
”gniyap
rof
.dnik
ni
yltrap
flesti
ynapmoc
eht
eht
gnidulcni
reciffO
lapicnirP .foereht
a
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.1 25
a
Notes –
(1) Section 206AA requires furnishing of PAN by the deductee to the deductor,
failing which the deductor has to deduct tax at the higher of the following
rates, namely, -
(i) at the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Income-tax Act,
1961; or
(ii) at the rate or rates in force; or
(iii) at the rate of 20% and in case of section 194-Q, 5%
(2) Section 206AB requires tax to be deducted at source under the provisions of
this Chapter on any sum or income or amount paid, or payable or credited,
by a person to a specified person, at higher of the following rates –
(i) at twice the rate prescribed in the relevant provision of the Act;
(ii) at twice the rate or rates in force i.e., the rate mentioned in the
Finance Act; or
(iii) at 5%
However, section 206AB is not applicable in case of tax deductible at source
under sections 192, 192A, 194B, 194BA, 194BB, 194-IA, 194-IB, 194M11 or
194N.
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for the assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
deducted, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source and
tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said previous
year.
However, the specified person would not include -
- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in India;
or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by
11 or section 194LBC (this section will be dealt with at the Final level)
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.12 7
a
the Central Government in this behalf (RBI has been notified by the
Central Government for this purpose).
(3) In case the provisions of section 206AA are also applicable to the specified
person, in addition to the provisions of this section, then, tax is required to
be deducted at higher of the two rates provided in section 206AA and
section 206AB.
(4) The threshold limit given in column (3) of the table is with respect to each
payee.
II Advance Payment of Tax
Liability for payment of advance tax [Sections 207 & 208]
Tax shall be payable in advance during any financial year in respect of the total
income (TI) of the assessee which would be chargeable to tax for the A.Y.
immediately following that financial year.
Advance tax is payable during a F.Y. in every case where the amount of such tax
payable by the assessee during the year is ` 10,000 or more.
However, an individual resident in India of the age of 60 years or more at any
time during the previous year, who does not have any income chargeable under
the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” (PGBP), is not liable to pay
advance tax.
Instalments of advance tax and due dates [Section 211]
Advance tax payment schedule for corporates and non-corporates (other
than an assessee computing profits on presumptive basis under section
44AD or section 44ADA) – Four instalments
Due date of instalment Amount payable
On or before 15th June Not less than 15% of advance tax liability.
On or before 15th Not less than 45% of advance tax liability (-)
September amount paid in earlier instalment.
On or before 15th Not less than 75% of advance tax liability (-)
December amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.
On or before 15th March The whole amount of advance tax liability (-)
amount paid in earlier instalment or instalments.
Advance tax payment by assessees computing profits on presumptive basis
under section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1)
An eligible assessee, computing profits or gains of business or profession on
presumptive basis in respect of eligible business referred to in section 44AD(1)
or in respect of eligible profession referred to in section 44ADA(1), shall be
required to pay advance tax of the whole amount on or before 15th March of
the F.Y.
However, any amount paid by way of advance tax on or before 31st March shall
also be treated as advance tax paid during the F.Y. ending on that day.
Interest for defaults in payment of advance tax [Section 234B]
(1) Interest u/s 234B is attracted for non-payment of advance tax or payment
of advance tax of an amount less than 90% of assessed tax.
(2) The interest liability would be 1% per month or part of the month from 1st
April following the F.Y. upto the date of determination of total income
under section 143(1) and where regular assessment is made, upto the date
of such regular assessment.
(3) Such interest is calculated on the amount of difference between the
assessed tax and the advance tax paid.
(4) “Assessed tax” means the tax on total income determined u/s 143(1) less
TDS & TCS, any relief of tax allowed u/s 89, any tax credit allowed to be set
off in accordance with the provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee
exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
Tax on the total income determined under section 143(1) shall not include
the additional income-tax, if any, payable u/s 140B.
(5) Where self-assessment tax is paid by the assessee u/s 140A or otherwise,
interest shall be calculated upto the date of payment of such tax and
reduced by the interest, if any, paid u/s 140A towards the interest
chargeable under this section. Thereafter, interest shall be calculated at 1%
on the amount by which the tax so paid together with the advance tax paid
falls short of the assessed tax.
Interest for deferment of advance tax [Section 234C]
(1) Manner of computation of interest u/s 234C for deferment of advance
tax by corporate and non-corporate assessees:
In case an assessee, other than an assessee who declares profits and gains
in accordance with the provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1),
who is liable to pay advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the
advance tax paid by such assessee on its current income on or before the
dates specified in column (1) below is less than the specified percentage
[given in column (2) below] of tax due on returned income, then simple
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.12 9
a
interest@1% per month for the period specified in column (4) on the
amount of shortfall, as per column (3) is leviable u/s 234C.
Specified Specified Shortfall in advance tax Period
date %
(1) (2) (3) (4)
15th June 15% 15% of tax due on returned 3 months
income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th June
15th 45% 45% of tax due on returned 3 months
September income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th September
15th 75% 75% of tax due on returned 3 months
December income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th December
15th March 100% 100% of tax due on returned 1 month
income (-) advance tax paid up
to 15th March
Note – However, if the advance tax paid by the assessee on the current income,
on or before 15th June or 15th September, is not less than 12% or 36% of the
tax due on the returned income, respectively, then, the assessee shall not be
liable to pay any interest on the amount of the shortfall on those dates.
Tax due on returned income = Tax chargeable on total income declared
in the return of income – TDS – TCS - any relief of tax allowed u/s 89 - any
tax credit allowed to be set off in accordance with the provisions of section
115JD, in case the assessee exercises the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(2) Computation of interest under section 234C in case of an assessee who
declares profits and gains in accordance with the provisions of section
44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1):
In case an assessee who declares profits and gains in accordance with the
provisions of section 44AD(1) or section 44ADA(1), who is liable to pay
advance tax u/s 208 has failed to pay such tax or the advance tax paid by
the assessee on its current income on or before 15th March is less than the
tax due on the returned income, then, the assessee shall be liable to pay
simple interest at the rate of 1% on the amount of the shortfall from the
tax due on the returned income.
(3) Non-applicability of interest under section 234C in certain cases:
Interest under section 234C shall not be leviable in respect of any shortfall
in payment of tax due on returned income, where such shortfall is on
account of under-estimate or failure to estimate –
(i) the amount of capital gains;
(ii) income of nature referred to in section 2(24)(ix) i.e., winnings from
lotteries, crossword puzzles etc.;
(iii) income under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession” in
cases where the income accrues or arises under the said head for the
first time.
(iv) the amount of dividend income other than deemed dividend referred
u/s 2(22)(e).
However, the assessee should have paid the whole of the amount of tax
payable in respect of such income referred to in (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv), as the
case may be, had such income been a part of the total income, as part of
the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due or where no such
instalments are due, by 31st March of the financial year.
Tax Collection at source [Section 206C]
(1) Sale of certain goods [Section 206C(1)] - Sellers of certain goods are
required to collect tax from the buyers at the specified rates. The specified
percentage for collection of tax at source is as follows:
Nature of Goods Percentage
(i) Alcoholic liquor for human consumption 1%
(ii) Tendu leaves 5%
(iii) Timber obtained under a forest lease 2.5%
(iv) Timber obtained by any mode other than (iii) 2.5%
(v) Any other forest produce not being timber or 2.5%
tendu leaves
(vi) Scrap 1%
(vii) Minerals, being coal or lignite or iron ore 1%
The tax should be collected at the time of debiting of the amount payable
by the buyer to his account or at the time of receipt of such amount from
the buyer, whichever is earlier.
However, no collection of tax shall be made in the case of a resident buyer,
if such buyer furnishes a declaration in writing in duplicate to the effect
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.13 1
a
that goods are to be utilised for the purpose of manufacturing, processing
or producing articles or things or for the purposes of generation of power
and not for trading purposes [Section 206C(1A)].
(2) Lease or a licence of parking lot, toll plaza or mine or a quarry
[Section 206C(1C)] - Every person who grants a lease or a licence or
enters into a contract or otherwise transfers any right or interest in any
- parking lot or
- toll plaza or
- a mine or a quarry
to another person (other than a public sector company) for the use of such
parking lot or toll plaza or mine or quarry for the purposes of business. The
tax shall be collected as provided, from the licensee or lessee of any such
licence, contract or lease of the specified nature, at the rate of 2%, at the
time of debiting of the amount payable by the licensee or lessee to his
account or at the time of receipt of such amount from the licensee or
lessee, whichever is earlier
(3) Sale of motor vehicle of value exceeding ` 10 lakhs [Section 206C(1F)]
- Every person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration
for sale of a motor vehicle of the value exceeding ` 10 lakhs, shall, at the
time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the sale
consideration.
With effect from 01.01.2025, the scope of section 206C(1F) has been
expanded to include every person, being a seller, who receives any amount
as consideration for sale of any other notified goods exceeding ` 10 lakhs, to,
at the time of receipt of such amount, collect tax from the buyer@1% of the
sale consideration.
(4) Remittance under LRS of RBI or purchase of an overseas tour package
[Section 206C(1G)] - Every person,
- being an authorized dealer, who receives amount under the
Liberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS) of the RBI for remittance from a
buyer, being a person remitting such amount,
- being seller of an overseas tour programme package who receives
any amount from the buyer who purchases the package
has to collect tax at the time of debiting of the amount payable by the
buyer or at the time of receipt of such amount from the said buyer by any
mode, whichever is earlier.
Rate of TCS in case of collection by an authorized dealer/ seller of an
overseas tour programme package
S. Amount and purpose of remittance Rate of TCS
No.
(i) Where the amount is for purchase of 5% till ` 7 lakhs, 20%
an overseas tour programme thereafter
package
(ii) (a) Where the amount or aggregate Nil
of the amounts being remitted by (No tax to be collected
a buyer is less than ` 7 lakhs in a at source)
financial year
(iii) (a) where the amount is remitted for 5% of the amt or agg.
the purpose of education or of amts in excess of ` 7
medical treatment; and lakh
(b) the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is
remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
(iv) (a) where the amount is remitted for 20% of the amt or agg.
the purpose other than of amts in excess of
mentioned in (iii) above; and ` 7 lakh
(b) the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is
remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
(v) (a) where the amount being remitted 0.5% of the amt or agg.
out is a loan obtained from any of amts in excess of ` 7
financial institution as defined in lakh
section 80E, for the purpose of
pursuing any education; and
(b) the amount or aggregate of the
amounts in excess of ` 7 lakhs is
remitted by the buyer in a
financial year
ADVANCE TAX, TDS AND TCS 7.13 3
a
Cases where no tax is to be collected
(i) No TCS by the authorized dealer on an amount in respect of which
the sum has been collected by the seller
(ii) No TCS, if the buyer is liable to deduct tax at source under any
other provision of the Act and has deducted such tax
(iii) No TCS, if the buyer is the Central Government, a State
Government, an embassy, a High Commission, a legation, a
commission, a consulate, the trade representation of a foreign
State, a local authority or any other person notified by the Central
Government, subject to fulfillment of conditions stipulated
thereunder.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide notification no. 99/2022 dated
17.8.2022, notified that the provisions of section 206C(1G) would
not apply to a person (being a buyer) who is a non-resident in
terms of section 6 and does not have a permanent establishment
in India.
(5) Sale of goods of value exceeding ` 50 lakh [Section 206C(1H)] - Every
person, being a seller, who receives any amount as consideration for sale
of goods of the value exceeding ` 50 lakhs in a previous year, other than
exported goods or goods covered in (a)/(c)/(d)], is required to collect tax at
source, at the time of receipt of such amount, @0.1% of the sale
consideration exceeding ` 50 lakhs.
However, tax is not required to be collected if the buyer is liable to deduct
tax at source under any other provision of the Act on the goods purchased
by him from the seller and has deducted such tax.
(6) In case of non-furnishing of PAN [PAN or Aadhaar number in case of
section 206C(1H)] by the collectee to the collector, tax is required to be
collected at the higher of –
(i) twice the rate specified in the relevant provisions of the Act; or
(ii) at 5% [1%, in case tax is required to be collected at source u/s
206C(1H)]. [Section 206CC]
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed 20%.
The provisions of section 206CC do not apply to a non-resident who does
not have a permanent establishment in India.
(7) Section 206CCA requires tax to be collected at source on any sum or
amount received by a person from a specified person, at higher of the
following rates –
(a) at twice the rate specified in the relevant provision of the Act;
(b) at 5%
However, the maximum the rate of TCS under this section shall not exceed
20%.
In case the provisions of section 206CC are also applicable to the specified
person, in addition to the provisions of section 206CCA, then, tax is
required to be collected at higher of the two rates provided in section
206CC and section 206CCA.
Meaning of “specified person” – A person who has not furnished the
return of income for assessment year relevant to the previous year
immediately preceding the financial year in which tax is required to be
collected, for which the time limit for furnishing the return of income under
section 139(1) has expired, and the aggregate of tax deducted at source
and tax collected at source in his case is ` 50,000 or more in the said
previous year.
However, the specified person would not include
- a non-resident who does not have a permanent establishment in
India; or
- a person who is not required to furnish the return of income for the
assessment year relevant to the said previous year and is notified by
the Central Government in this behalf (RBI has been notified by the
Central Government for this purpose).
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Ashwin doing manufacture and wholesale trade furnishes you the following
information:
Total turnover for the financial year -
Particulars `
2023-24 1,05,00,000
2024-25 95,00,000
Examine whether tax deduction at source provisions are attracted for the
below said expenses incurred during the financial year 2024-25:
Particulars `
Interest paid to UCO Bank on 15.8.2024 41,000
Contract payment to Raj (2 contracts of ` 12,000 each) on 24,000
12.12.2024
Shop rent paid (one payee) on 21.1.2025 2,50,000
Commission paid to Balu on 15.3.2025 7,000
2. Compute the amount of tax deduction at source on the following payments
made by M/s S Ltd. during the financial year 2024-25 as per the provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961.
S. Date Nature of Payment
No.
(i) 1-10-2024 Payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. R, a transporter who
owns 8 goods carriages throughout the previous year
and furnishes a declaration to this effect alongwith his
PAN.
(ii) 1-11-2024 Payment of fee for technical services of ` 25,000 and
Royalty of ` 20,000 to Mr. Shyam who is having PAN.
(iii) 30-06-2024 Payment of ` 25,000 to M/s X Ltd. for repair of
building.
(iv) 01-01-2025 Payment of ` 2,00,000 made to Mr. A for purchase of
diaries made according to specifications of
M/s S Ltd. However, no material was supplied for such
diaries to Mr. A by M/s S Ltd or its associates.
(v) 01-01-2025 Payment of ` 2,30,000 made to Mr. Bharat for
compulsory acquisition of his house as per law of the
State Government.
(vi) 01-02-2025 Payment of commission of ` 14,000 to Mr. Y.
3. Examine the applicability of TDS provisions and TDS amount in the following
cases:
(a) Rent paid for hire of machinery by B Ltd. to Mr. Raman ` 2,60,000 on
27.9.2024.
(b) Fee paid on 1.12.2024 to Dr. Srivatsan by Sundar (HUF) ` 35,000 for
surgery performed on a member of the family.
(c) ABC and Co. Ltd. paid ` 19,000 to one of its Directors as sitting fees on
01-01-2025.
4. Examine the applicability of tax deduction at source provisions, the rate and
amount of tax deduction in the following cases for the F.Y. 2024-25:
(1) Payment made by a company to Mr. Ram, sub-contractor, ` 3,00,000 with
outstanding balance of ` 1,20,000 shown in the books as on 31.3.2025.
(2) Winning from horse race ` 1,50,000 paid to Mr. Shyam, an Indian
resident.
(3) ` 2,00,000 paid to Mr. A, a resident individual, on 22-02-2025 by the
State of Uttar Pradesh on compulsory acquisition of his urban land.
5. Briefly discuss the provisions relating to payment of advance tax on
income arising from capital gains and casual income.
ANSWERS
1. As the turnover of business carried on by Ashwin for F.Y. 2023-24, has
exceeded ` 1 crore, he has to comply with the tax deduction provisions
during the financial year 2024-25, subject to the exemptions provided for
under the relevant sections for applicability of TDS provisions.
Interest paid to UCO Bank
TDS under section 194A is not attracted in respect of interest paid to a
banking company.
Contract payment of ` 24,000 to Raj for 2 contracts of ` 12,000 each
TDS provisions under section 194C would not be attracted if the amount
paid to a contractor does not exceed ` 30,000 in a single payment or
` 1,00,000 in the aggregate during the financial year. Therefore, TDS
provisions under section 194C are not attracted in this case.
Shop Rent paid to one payee – Tax has to be deducted@10% under
section 194-I as the annual rental payment exceeds ` 2,40,000.
Commission paid to Balu – No, tax has to be deducted under section 194H
in this case as the commission does not exceed ` 15,000.
2. (i) No tax is required to be deducted at source under section 194C by
M/s S Ltd. on payment to transporter Mr. R, since he satisfies the
following conditions:
(1) He owns ten or less goods carriages at any time during the
previous year.
(2) He is engaged in the business of plying, hiring or leasing goods
carriages;
(3) He has furnished a declaration to this effect along with his PAN.
(ii) As per section 194J, liability to deduct tax is attracted only in case the
payment made as fees for technical services and royalty, individually,
exceeds ` 30,000 during the financial year. In the given case, since, the
individual payments for fee of technical services i.e., ` 25,000 and
royalty ` 20,000 is less than ` 30,000 each, there is no liability to
deduct tax at source. It is assumed that no other payment towards
fees for technical services and royalty were made during the year to
Mr. Shyam.
(iii) Provisions of section 194C are not attracted in this case, since the
payment for repair of building on 30.06.2024 to M/s X Ltd. is less than
the threshold limit of ` 30,000.
(iv) According to section 194C, the definition of “work” does not include
the manufacturing or supply of product according to the specification
by customer in case the material is purchased from a person other
than the customer or associate of such customer.
Therefore, there is no liability to deduct tax at source in respect of
payment of ` 2,00,000 to Mr. A, since the contract is a contract for
‘sale’.
(v) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
property, is responsible for deduction of tax at source if such payment
or the aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000.
In the given case, no liability to deduct tax at source is attracted as the
payment made does not exceed ` 2,50,000.
(vi) As per section 194H, tax is deductible at source if the amount of
commission or brokerage or the aggregate of the amounts of
commission or brokerage credited or paid during the financial year
exceeds ` 15,000.
Since the commission payment made to Mr. Y does not exceed
` 15,000, the provisions of section 194H are not attracted.
3. (a) Since the rent paid for hire of machinery by B. Ltd. to Mr. Raman
exceeds ` 2,40,000, the provisions of section 194-I for deduction of tax
at source are attracted.
The rate applicable for deduction of tax at source under section 194-I
on rent paid for hire of plant and machinery is 2%, assuming that
Mr. Raman had furnished his permanent account number to B Ltd.
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:
= ` 2,60,000 x 2% = ` 5,200.
Note: In case Mr. Raman does not furnish his permanent account
number to B Ltd., tax shall be deducted @ 20% on ` 2,60,000, by
virtue of provisions of section 206AA.
(b) As per the provisions of section 194J, a Hindu Undivided Family is
required to deduct tax at source on fees paid for professional services
only if the total sales, gross receipts or turnover form the business or
profession exceed ` 1 crore in case of business or ` 50 lakhs in case of
profession, as the case may be, in the financial year preceding the
current financial year and such payment made for professional
services is not exclusively for the personal purpose of any member of
Hindu Undivided Family.
Section 194M, provides for deduction of tax at source by a HUF (which
is not required to deduct tax at source under section 194J) in respect
of fees for professional service if such sum or aggregate of such sum
exceeds ` 50 lakhs during the financial year.
In the given case, the fees for professional service to Dr. Srivatsan is
paid on 1.12.2024 for a personal purpose, therefore, section 194J is
not attracted. Section 194M would have been attracted if the payment
or aggregate of payments exceeded ` 50 lakhs in the P.Y.2024-25.
However, since the payment does not exceed ` 50 lakh in this case,
there is no liability to deduct tax at source under section 194M also.
(c) Section 194J provides for deduction of tax at source @10% from any
sum paid by way of any remuneration or fees or commission, by
whatever name called, to a resident director, which is not in the nature
of salary on which tax is deductible under section 192. The threshold
limit of ` 30,000 upto which the provisions of tax deduction at source
are not attracted in respect of every other payment covered under
section 194J is, however, not applicable in respect of sum paid to a
director.
Therefore, tax@10% has to be deducted at source under section 194J
in respect of the sum of ` 19,000 paid by ABC Ltd. to its director.
Therefore, the amount of tax to be deducted at source:
= ` 19,000 x 10% = ` 1,900
4. (1) Provisions of tax deduction at source under section 194C are attracted
in respect of payment by a company to a sub-contractor. Under
section 194C, tax is deductible at the time of credit or payment,
whichever is earlier @1% in case the payment is made to an individual.
Since the aggregate amount credited or paid during the year is
` 4,20,000, tax is deductible @1% on ` 4,20,000.
Tax to be deducted = ` 4,20,000 x 1% = ` 4,200
(2) Under section 194BB, tax is to be deducted at source, if the winnings
from horse races exceed ` 10,000. The rate of deduction of tax at
source is 30%.
Hence, tax to be deducted = ` 1,50,000 x 30% = ` 45,000.
(3) As per section 194LA, any person responsible for payment to a
resident, any sum in the nature of compensation or consideration on
account of compulsory acquisition under any law, of any immovable
property, is required to deduct tax at source, if such payment or the
aggregate amount of such payments to the resident during the
financial year exceeds ` 2,50,000.
In the given case, there is no liability to deduct tax at source as the
payment made to Mr. A does not exceed ` 2,50,000.
5. The proviso to section 234C contains the provisions for payment of advance
tax in case of capital gains and casual income.
Advance tax is payable by an assessee on his/its total income, which
includes capital gains and casual income like income from lotteries,
crossword puzzles, etc.
Since it is not possible for the assessee to estimate his capital gains, or
income from lotteries etc., it has been provided that if any such income
arises after the due date for any instalment, then, the entire amount of the
tax payable (after considering tax deducted at source) on such capital gains
or casual income should be paid in the remaining instalments of advance
tax, which are due.
Where no such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31st
March of the relevant financial year.
No interest liability on late payment would arise if the entire tax liability is so paid.
Note: In case of casual income the entire tax liability is fully deductible at
source @30% under section 194B, 194BA and 194BB. Therefore, advance tax
liability would arise only if the surcharge, if any, and health and education
cess@4% in respect thereof, along with tax liability in respect of other income,
if any, is 10,000 or more.
CHAPTER
PROVISIONS FOR
FILING RETURN OF
INCOME AND
SELF ASSESSMENT
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to–
♦ comprehend as to what is a “return of income”;
♦ identify the persons who have to compulsorily file a return of
income;
♦ identify and recall the due date for filing return of income for
different assessees;
♦ examine the consequences of late filing of return;
♦ compute the interest payable for delayed filing of return of
income;
♦ compute the fee payable for delayed filing of return of income;
♦ appreciate when a return of income can be revised and the
time limit within which a return has to be revised;
♦ appreciate when an updated return of income can be filed;
♦ appreciate the man ner of computation of tax payable on the
basis of updated return;
♦ identify the persons who are required to apply for permanent
account number;
♦ identify the transactions in respect of which quoting of PAN is
mandatory;
♦ appreciate who are the specified classes of persons who can
file return through Tax Return Preparer;
♦ identify the persons who are authorised to verify the return of
income in the case of different assessees in various
circumstances;
♦ appreciate the requirement to pay self-assessment tax before
filing return of income;
♦ appreciate the order of adjustment of amount paid by the
assessee against self-assessment tax, fee and interest.
8.3
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
Interest and fee
for default in
Filing of Return Other Provisions
furnishing return
of income
Permanent Account
Number
[Section 139A]
Compulsory filing
of Return of
Quoting of Aadhaar
Income
Number
[Section 139(1)] Interest for default
[Section 139AA]
in furnishing
return of income Fee for non intimation
Return of Loss [Section 234A] of Aadhaar Number
[Section 139(3)] [Section 234H]
Submission of returns
through Tax Return
Preparers
Belated Return
[Section 139B]
[Section 139(4)]
Person authorised to
verify return of income
[Section 140]
Revised Return Self-Assessment
[Section 139(5)] Fee for default in [Section 140A]
furnishing return
of income
[Section 234F] Tax on updated
return
Updated Return
[Section 140B]
[Section 139(8A)]
1. RETURN OF INCOME
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains provisions for filing of return of income. Return
of income is the format in which the assessee furnishes information, as self-
declaration, regarding his total income and tax payable. The format for filing of
returns by different assessees is notified by the CBDT. The particulars of income
earned under different heads, gross total income, deductions from gross total
income, total income and tax payable by the assessee are generally required to be
furnished in a return of income. In short, a return of income is the declaration of
income and the resultant tax by the assessee in the prescribed format.
2. COMPULSORY FILING OF RETURN OF INCOME
[SECTION 139(1)]
(1) As per section 139(1), it is compulsory for companies and firms to file a return
of income or loss for every previous year on or before the due date in the
prescribed form.
(2) In case of a person other than a company or a firm, filing of return of income
on or before the due date is mandatory, if his total income or the total income
of any other person in respect of which he is assessable under this Act during
the previous year exceeds the basic exemption limit.
(3) Every person, being a resident other than not ordinarily resident in India
within the meaning of section 6(6), who is not required to furnish a return
under section 139(1), would be required to file a return of income or loss for
the previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner on or before the due date, if such person, at any time during the
previous year, -
(a) holds, as a beneficial owner or otherwise, any asset (including any
financial interest in any entity) located outside India or has a signing
authority in any account located outside India; or
(b) is a beneficiary of any asset (including any financial interest in any
entity) located outside India.
However, an individual being a beneficiary of any asset (including any
financial interest in any entity) located outside India would not be
required to file return of income under this clause, where, income, if
8.5
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
any, arising from such asset is includible in the income of the person
referred to in (a) above in accordance with the provisions of the Income-
tax Act, 1961.
Meaning of “beneficial owner” and “beneficiary” in respect of an asset for
the purpose of section 139:
An individual who has provided, directly or indirectly,
Beneficial
consideration for the asset for the immediate or future
Owner
benefit,directorindirect,ofhimself oranyotherperson
An individual who derives benefit from the asset during the
Beneficiary previous year and the consideration for such asset has been
providedbyanyperson,otherthansuchbeneficiary.
Requirement of filing of return of income as per the fourth and fifth
proviso to section 139(1)
A resident other than not ordinarily resident within the meaning of section 6(6)
who is not required to furnish a return of income u/s 139(1)
AND
who at any time during the P.Y.
A B
OR
is a beneficiary of any asset
holds, as beneficial owner has a signing
(including financial interest in
or otherwise, any asset authority in any
any entity) located outside India
OR
(including financial account located
interest in any entity) outside India
located outside India
However, where any income arising from such asset is includible in the hands of the person
specified in (A) in accordance with the provisions of the Act, an individual, being a beneficiary
of such asset, is not required to file return of income under the fourth proviso.
(4) Further, every person, be ing an individual or a HUF or an AOP/BOI, whether
incorporated or not, or an artificial juridical person -
− whose total income or the total income of any other person in respect
of which he is assessable under this Act during the previous year
− without giving effect to the provisions of Chapter VI-A or section
54/54B/54D/54EC/54F1
− exceeded the basic exemption limit
is required to file a return of his income or income of such other person on
or before the due date in the prescribed form and manner and setting forth
the prescribed particulars.
The basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 for individuals/HUF/AOPs/BOIs and
artificial juridical persons under default tax regime under section 115BAC.
This amount denotes the level of total income, which is arrived at after
claiming the admissible deductions under Chapter VI-A i.e., 80CCD(2),
80CCH(2) and 80JJAA under default tax regime and exemption under section
54/54B/54D/ 54EC or 54F in respect of capital gain. However, the level of total
income to be considered for the purpose of filing return of income is the
income before claiming the admissible deductions under Chapter VI-A and
exemption under section 54/54B/54D/54EC or 54F.
However, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A), the basic exemption
limit would be ` 2,50,000 for individuals/HUF/AOPs/ BOIs and artificial
juridical persons, ` 3,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 60 years but
less than 80 years and ` 5,00,000 for resident individuals of the age of 80
years or more at any time during the previous year. Also, the assessee would
be eligible for other deductions under Chapter VI-A subject to fulfilling the
stipulated conditions.
(5) Any person other than a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a
return under section 139(1), is required to file income-tax return in the
prescribed form and manner on or before the due date if, during the previous
year, such person –
1or 54G or 54GA. (These sections will be dealt with in detail at the Final level)
8.7
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(a) has deposited an amount or aggregate of the amounts exceeding
` 1 crore in one or more current accounts maintained with a banking
company or a co-operative bank; or
(b) has incurred expenditure of an amount or aggregate of the amounts
exceeding ` 2 lakh for himself or any other person for travel to a foreign
country; or
(c) has incurred expenditure of an amount or aggregate of the amounts
exceeding ` 1 lakh towards consumption of electricity; or
(d) fulfils such other prescribed conditions.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 37/2022 dated 21.4.2022,
inserted Rule 12AB to provide that a person, other than a company or a firm,
who is not required to furnish a return under section 139(1), and who fulfils
any of the following conditions during the previous year has to file their
return of income on or before the due date in the prescribed form and
manner -
(i) if his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may be, in the
business > ` 60 lakhs during the previous year; or
(ii) if his total gross receipts in profession > ` 10 lakhs during the previous
year; or
(iii) if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year, in the case
of the person, is ` 25,000 or more; or
However, a resident individual who is of the age of 60 years or more, at
any time during the relevant previous year would be required to file
return of income only, if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the
previous year, in his case, is ` 50,000 or more
(iv) the deposit in one or more savings bank account of the person, in
aggregate, is ` 50 lakhs or more during the previous year.
(6) All such persons mentioned in (1) to (5) above should, on or before the due
date, furnish a return of his income or the income of such other person during
the previous year in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed
manner and setting forth such other particulars as may be prescribed.
Meaning of due date:
‘Due date’ means -
(i) 31st October of the assessment year, where the assessee, other than an
assessee referred to in (ii) below, is -
(a) a company,
(b) a person (other than a company) whose accounts are required to be
audited under the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law for the time
being in force; or
(c) a partner of a firm whose accounts are required to be audited under
the Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law for the time being in
force2.
(ii) 30th November of the assessment year, in the case of an assessee
including the partners of the firm2 being such assessee who is required
to furnish a report referred to in section 92E.
(iii) 31st July of the assessment year, in the case of any other assessee.
Note – Section 92E is not covered within the scope of syllabus of Intermediate Paper
4A: Income-tax Law. Section 139(1) provides an extended due date, i.e., 30th
November of the assessment year, for assessees who have to file a transfer pricing
report i.e., accountant’s report u/s 92E (i.e. assessees who have undertaken
international transactions with associated enterprises). Therefore, reference has been
made to this section, i.e. section 92E, for explaining this provision in section 139(1).
ILLUSTRATION 1
Paras aged 55 years is a resident of India. During the F.Y. 2024-25, interest of
` 2,88,000 was credited to his Non-resident (External) Account with SBI. ` 30,000,
being interest on fixed deposit with SBI, was credited to his saving bank account
during this period. He also earned ` 3,000 as interest on this saving account. Is Paras
required to file return of income?
What will be your answer, if he has incurred ` 3 lakhs as travel expenditure of self
and spouse to US to stay with his married daughter for some time?
2 or the spouse of such partner if the provisions of section 5A applies to such spouse
8.9
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
SOLUTION
An individual is required to furnish a return of income under section 139(1) if his total
income, before giving effect to the deductions under Chapter VI-A or exemption under
section or section 54/54B/54D/54EC or 54F, exceeds the maximum amount not
chargeable to tax i.e. ` 3,00,000 under default tax regime u/s 115BAC(1A) and
` 2,50,000 if exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A) (for A.Y. 2025-26).
Computation of total income of Mr. Paras for A.Y. 2025-26
Particulars
`
Income from other sources
Interest earned from Non-resident (External) Account ` 2,88,000 NIL
[Exempt under section 10(4)(ii), assuming that Mr. Paras has been
permitted by RBI to maintain the aforesaid account]
Interest on fixed deposit with SBI 30,000
Interest on savings bank account 3,000
Gross Total Income 33,000
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A (not available under the default -
tax regime under section 115BAC)
Total Income 33,000
In case he exercises the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A), he would be eligible for deduction of ` 3,000 under
section 80TTA. Accordingly, his total income would be ` 30,000. However, in both
regimes, total income of ` 33,000, before giving effect to deductions under Chapter
VI-A, would be considered.
Since the total income of Mr. Paras for A.Y.2025-26, before giving effect to the
deductions under Chapter VI-A, is less than the basic exemption limit in both
regimes, he is not required to file return of income for A.Y.2025-26.
Note: In the above solution, interest of ` 2,88,000 earned from Non-resident
(External) account has been taken as exempt on the assumption that Mr. Paras, a
resident, has been permitted by RBI to maintain the aforesaid account. However, in
case he has not been so permitted, the said interest would be taxable. In such a
case, his total income, before giving effect to, inter alia, the deductions under
Chapter VI-A, would be ` 3,21,0 00 (` 30,000 + ` 2,88,000 + ` 3,000), which is higher
than the basic exemption limit of ` 3,00,000 or ` 2,50,000, as the case may be.
Consequently, he would be required to file return of income for A.Y.2025-26.
If he has incurred expenditure of ` 3 lakhs on foreign travel of self and spouse, he
has to mandatorily file his return of income on or before the due date under section
139(1), even if his income is less than the basic exemption limit.
3. SPECIFIED CLASS OR CLASSES OF PERSONS TO
BE EXEMPTED FROM FILING RETURN OF
INCOME [SECTION 139(1C)]
(1) Every person who falls within the ambit of the conditions mentioned under
section 139 has to furnish a return of his income on or before the due date
specified under section 139(1).
(2) For reducing the compliance burden of small taxpayers, the Central
Government has been empowered to notify the class or classes of persons
who will be exempted from the requirement of filing of return of income,
subject to satisfying the prescribed conditions.
4. RETURN OF LOSS [SECTION 139(3)]
(1) This section requires the assessee to file a return of loss in the same manner
as in the case of return of income within the time allowed u/s 139(1).
(2) Section 80 requires mandatory filing of return of loss u/s 139(3) on or before
the due date specified u/s 139(1) for carry forward of the following losses -
(a) Business loss u/s 72(1)
(b) Speculation business loss u/s 73(2)
(c) Loss from specified business u/s 73A(2) [In case assesse has exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided under
section 115BAC(1A)]
(d) Loss under the head “Capital Gains” u/s 74(1)
(e) Loss from the activity of owning and maintaining race horses u/s 74A(3)
8.11
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(3) Consequently, section 139(3) requires filing of return of loss mandatorily
within the time allowed u/s 139(1) for claiming carry forward of losses
mentioned in (2) above.
(4) However, loss under the head “Income from house property” u/s 71B and
unabsorbed depreciation u/s 32 can be carried forward for set-off even
though return of loss has not been filed before the due date.
(5) A return of loss has to be filed by the assessee in his own interest and the non-
receipt of a notice from the Assessing Officer requiring him to file the return
cannot be a valid excuse under any circumstances for the non-filing of such return.
5. BELATED RETURN [SECTION 139(4)]
Any person who has not furnished a return within the time allowed to him under
section 139(1) may furnish the return for any previous year at any time -
(i) before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e.,
31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
(ii) before the completion of the assessment,
whichever is earlier.
Hence, belated return cannot be filed after 31st December of the relevant
assessment year.
6. REVISED RETURN [SECTION 139(5)]
If any person having furnished a return under section 139(1) or a belated return
under section 139(4), discovers any omission or any wrong statement therein, he
may furnish a revised return at any time –
(i) before three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year (i.e.,
31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
(ii) before completion of assessment,
whichever is earlier.
Hence, belated return cannot be filed after 31st December of the relevant
assessment year.
QUICK RECAP
Mandatory filing of return of income [Section 139(1)]
Person being Person who during Persons who during
Resident Individual, HUF, the P.Y. - the P.Y. -
other than AOPs or BOIs -has deposited > ` 1 -has total sales,
RNOR, having and artificial crore in one or more turnover or gross
any asset juridical persons current accounts with receipts in the
located having total bank or a co- business > `60 lakhs
outside India income
Company operative bank; or -has total gross
or signing exceeding basic
and aa nu yt h ao cr ci oty u i nn t e bxe em fop reti o gn iv l ii nm gi t - >h `a 2s i ln ac ku hr fr oed r he ix mp s. eo lff receip >t s ` 1in 0 p lar ko hfe sssion
Firm
located effect to the or any other person -has aggregate TDS
outside India provisions of for travel to a foreign and TCS credit ≥
or is Chapter VI-A or country; or `25,000 (`50,000 in
beneficiary of exemption u/s -has incurred exp of case of senior citizen)
any asset 54/54B/54D/ > `1 lakh towards -has deposit in one or
located 54EC or 54F electricity more savings bank
outside India consumption; account ≥ `50 lakhs
Due date of filing of return
30th November of A.Y 31st October of A.Y. 31stJuly of
•assessee, including partner of the •Company A.Y.
firm, being such assessee who is •Person other than company, whose accounts are •Any other
requiredtofurnishareportreferred required to be audited assessee
toinsection92E. •A partner of a firm, whose accounts are required to
be audited
Loss Return under section 139(3)
To be filed on or before the due date under section 139(1) for carry forward of
Loss from Loss from Loss from the activity
Business Loss under the
speculation specified of owning and
loss u/s head "Capital
business u/s business u/s maintaning race
72(1) Gains" u/s 74(1)
73(2) 73A(2) horses u/s 74A(3)
Belated Return under section 139(4)
If return not filed within the time specified u/s 139(1), the assessee can file belated
return u/s 139(4), at any time before
Three months prior to the end of the
OR Completion of the Assessment
Relevant Assessment Year
Whichever is earlier
Revised Return under Section 139(5)
Return filed u/s 139(1) or u/s 139(4) can be revised u/s 139(5), if any omission or
any wrong statement is discovered by the assessee, at any time before
Three months prior to the end of the
OR Completion of the Assessment
Relevant Assessment Year
Whichever is earlier
8.13
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
ILLUSTRATION 2
Explain with brief reasons whether the return of income can be revised under section
139(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in the following cases:
(i) Belated return filed under section 139(4).
(ii) Return already revised once under section 139(5).
(iii) Return of loss filed under section 139(3).
SOLUTION
Any person who has furnished a return under section 139(1) or 139(4) can file a
revised return at any time before three months prior to the end of the relevant
assessment year or before the completion of assessment, whichever is earlier, if he
discovers any omission or any wrong statement in the return filed earlier.
Accordingly,
(i) A belated return filed under section 139(4) can be revised.
(ii) A return revised earlier can be revised again as the first revised return replaces
the original return. Therefore, if the assessee discovers any omission or wrong
statement in such a revised return, he can furnish a second revised return
within the prescribed time i.e. at any time before three months prior to the
end of the relevant assessment year or before the completion of assessment,
whichever is earlier. It implies that a return of income can be revised more
than once within the prescribed time.
(iii) A return of loss filed under section 139(3) is deemed to be return filed under
section 139(1), and therefore, can be revised under section 139(5).
7. INTEREST FOR DEFAULT IN FURNISHING
RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION 234A]
(1) Interest under section 234A is attracted for failure to file a return of income
on or before the due date under section 139(1) i.e., interest is payable where
an assessee furnishes the return of income after the due date or does not
furnish the return of income.
(2) Simple interest @1% per month or part of the month is payable for the period
commencing from the date immediately following the due date and ending
on the following dates -
Circumstances Ending on the following dates
Where the return is furnished the date of furnishing of the return
after due date
Where no return is furnished the date of completion of assessment
(3) The interest has to be calculated on the amount of tax on total income as
determined under section 143(1) and where a regular assessment is made, on
the amount of the tax on the total income determined under regular
assessment, as reduced by the advance tax paid and any tax deducted or
collected at source, any relief of tax allowed under section 89 and any tax
credit allowed to be set-off in accordance with section 115JD, in case the
assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime
provided under section 115BAC(1A).
(4) No interest under section 234A shall be charged on self-assessment tax paid
by the assessee on or before the due date of filing of return.
(5) The interest payable under section 234A shall be reduced by the interest, if
any, paid on self-assessment under section 140A towards interest chargeable
under section 234A.
(6) Tax on total income as determined under section 143(1) would not include
the additional income-tax, if any, payable under section 140B or section 143.
(7) Tax on total income determined under regular assessment would not include
the additional income-tax payable under section 140B.
Note – Section 143(1) provides that if any sum is found due on the basis of a return of
income after adjustment of advance tax, relief of tax allowed under section 89, tax
deducted at source, tax collection at source and self-assessment tax, an intimation would
be sent to the assessee and such intimation is deemed to be a notice of demand issued
under section 156. If any refund is due on the basis of the return, it shall be granted to
the assessee and intimation to this effect would be sent to the assessee. Where no tax or
refund is due, the acknowledgement of the return is deemed to be intimation under
section 156.
8.15
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
8. SELF-ASSESSMENT [SECTION 140A]
(1) Payment of tax, interest and fee before furnishing return of income
[Section 140A(1)]
Where any tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be furnished
under, inter alia, section 139, after taking into account -
(i) the amount of tax, already paid, under any provision of the Income-tax
Act, 1961
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89
(iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the provisions of
section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting
out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and
(v) any tax or interest payable as per the provisions of section 191(2),
the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee
payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing the return
or any default or delay in payment of advance tax before furnishing the
return. The return has to be accompanied by the proof of payment of such
tax, interest and fee.
(2) Order of adjustment of amount paid by the assessee
Where the amount paid by the assessee under section 140A(1) falls short of
the aggregate of the tax, interest and fee as aforesaid, the amount so paid
shall first be adjusted towards the fee payable and thereafter towards interest
and the balance, if any, shall be adjusted towards the tax payable.
(3) Interest under section 234A [Section 140A(1A)]
For the above purpose, interest payable under section 234A shall be
computed on the amount of tax on the total income as declared in the return,
as reduced by the amount of-
(i) advance tax paid, if any;
(ii) any tax deducted or collected at source;
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89
(iv) any tax credit claim ed to be set-off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
(4) Interest under section 234B [Section 140A(1B)]
Interest payable under section 234B shall be computed on the assessed tax
or on the amount by which the advance tax paid falls short of the assessed
tax.
For this purpose “assessed tax” means the tax on total income declared in the
return as reduced by the amount of
- tax deducted or collected at source on any income which forms part of
the total income;
- any relief of tax claimed under section 89
- any tax credit claimed to be set-off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
(5) Consequence of failure to pay tax, interest or fee [Section 140A(3)]
If any assessee fails to pay the whole or any part of such of tax or interest or
fee, he shall be deemed to be an assessee in default in respect of such tax or
interest or fee remaining unpaid and all the provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly.
9. UPDATED RETURN OF INCOME [SECTION
139(8A)]
(1) Option to furnish updated return - Any person may furnish an updated
return of his income or the income of any other person in respect of which
he is assessable, for the previous year relevant to the assessment year at any
time within 24 months from the end of the relevant assessment year.
8.17
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
This is irrespective of whether or not he has furnished a return under section
139(1) or belated return under section 139(4) or revised return under section
139(5) for that assessment year.
For example, an updated return for A.Y. 2024-25 can be filed till 31.3.2027.
(2) Non applicability of the provisions of updated return – The provisions of
updated return would not apply, if the updated return of such person for that
assessment year –
(i) is a loss return; or
(ii) has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability determined on the
basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or
section 139(5); or
(iii) results in refund or increases the refund due on the basis of return
furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5).
(3) Updated return can be filed if original return is a loss return and updated
return is a return of income - If any person has a loss in any previous year
and has furnished a return of loss on or before the due date of filing return
of income under section 139(1), he shall be allowed to furnish an updated
return if such updated return is a return of income.
For example if Mr. X has furnished his return of loss for A.Y. 2024-25 on
31.5.2024 consisting of ` 5,00,000 as business loss, he can furnish an updated
return for A.Y. 2024-25 upto 31.3.2027 if such updated return is a return of
income.
(4) Updated return to be furnished for subsequent previous year in case (3)
above - If the loss or any part thereof carried forward under Chapter VI or
unabsorbed depreciation carried forward under section 32(2) or tax credit
carried forward under section 115JD is to be reduced for any subsequent
previous year as a result of furnishing of updated return of income for a
previous year, an updated return is required to be furnished for each such
subsequent previous year [In case assessee has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A)].
(5) Circumstances in which updated return cannot be furnished: No updated
return shall be furnished in the following scenarios –
S.No. Scenarios Updated return
cannot be furnished
(i) Where a person has furnished an updated
return under this sub-section for the relevant
assessment year.
(ii) Where any proceeding for assessment, for such relevant
reassessment, recomputation, or revision of Assessment Year.
income is pending or has been completed for
the relevant assessment year in his case.
(6) Updated return for the relevant assessment year cannot be furnished by such
person or belongs to such class of persons, as may be notified by the Board
in this regard.
Note - There are other circumstances also in which updated return cannot be
furnished for the relevant assessment year. For example, where prosecution
proceedings are initiated under the relevant provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Those circumstances will be dealt with at Final level.
10. TAX ON UPDATED RETURN [SECTION 140B]
(1) Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before furnishing
updated return of income
(a) In a case where no return is furnished earlier [Section 140B(1)]
(I) Tax to be paid along with interest and fee before furnishing of
updating return:
Where no return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) has been
furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated
return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the
assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest and
fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in
furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance
tax, along with the payment of additional tax computed under section
140B(3), before furnishing the return.
8.19
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such
tax, additional income-tax, interest and fee.
(II) Manner of computation of tax payable on the basis of updated
return
The tax payable is to be computed after taking into account the
following -
(i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid, as advance tax;
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source;
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89; and
(iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the provisions of
section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised the option of
shifting out of the default tax regime provided under section
115BAC(1A).
(III) Interest under section 234A if no earlier return has been furnished
In a case, where no earlier return has been furnished, the interest
payable under section 234A has to be computed on the amount of the
tax on the total income as declared in the updated return under section
139(8A), in accordance with the provisions of section 140A(1A).
(b) In a case where return is furnished earlier [Section 140B(2)]
(I) Tax to be paid along with interest before furnishing updated
return:
Where, return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) or 139(5) has
been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of
updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A),
the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with interest
payable under any provision of this Act for any default or delay in
payment of advance tax, along with the payment of additional tax
computed under section 140B(3) (as reduced by the amount of
interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier return)
before furnishing the return.
The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of such
tax, additional income-tax and interest.
(II) Manner of computation of tax payable on the basis of updated
return:
The tax payable has to be computed after taking into account the
following -
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the credit
for which has been taken in the earlier return;
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such
deduction or collection and which is taken into account in
computing total income and which has not been included in the
earlier return;
(iii) any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in the earlier return,
in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and
the aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if any,
issued in respect of such earlier return.
(III) Interest under section 234B where earlier return has been furnished
[Section 140B(4)]
In a case where an earlier return has been furnished, interest payable
under section 234B has to be computed on the assessed tax.
“Assessed tax” means the tax on the total income as declared in the
updated return to be furnished under section 139(8A), after taking into
account the following:
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the credit
for which has been taken in the earlier return, if any;
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is subject to such
deduction or collection and which is taken into account in
8.21
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
computing total income and which has not been included in the
earlier return;
(iii) any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the provisions
of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in the earlier return, in
case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A); and
the aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if any,
issued in respect of such earlier return.
(IV) Interest under section 234C if earlier return has been furnished
Interest payable under section 234C, where an earlier return has been
furnished, has to be computed after taking into account the total
income furnished in the updated return as returned income.
(2) Additional income-tax payable at the time of updated return [Section
140B(3)]
The additional income-tax payable at the time of furnishing the updated
return under section 139(8A) would be –
S.No. Time of furnishing updated return Additional Income-
tax Payable
(i) If such return is furnished after expiry 25% of aggregate of
of the time available under section tax and interest
139(4) or 139(5) of the assessment year payable, as determined
and before completion of the period of in (1) above
12 months from the end of the relevant
assessment year;
(ii) If such return is furnished after the 50% of aggregate of
expiry of 12 months from the end of the tax and interest
relevant assessment year but before payable, as determined
completion of the period of 24 months in (1) above
from the end of the relevant
assessment year.
Computation of Additional income-tax
For the purpose of computation of Additional income-tax”,
- tax would include su rcharge and cess, by whatever name called, on such
tax.
- the interest payable would be interest chargeable under any provision
of the Act, on the income as per updated return furnished under section
139(8A), as reduced by interest paid in the earlier return, if any.
However, the interest paid in the earlier return would be considered to
be nil, if no earlier return has been furnished.
Note - An updated return furnished under section 139(8A) would be regarded
as defective return as referred u/s 139(9) unless such return of income is
accompanied by the proof of payment of tax as required under section 140B.
(3) Power to CBDT to issue guidelines
In case of any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this section,
the CBDT may issue guidelines for the purpose of removing the difficulty, with
the approval of the Central Government. Every guideline issued shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
11. DEFECTIVE RETURN [SECTION 139(9)]
(1) Under this section, the Assessing Officer has the power to call upon the
assessee to rectify a defective return.
(2) Where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income furnished by
the assessee is defective, he may intimate the defect to the assessee and give
him an opportunity to rectify the defect within 15 days from the date of
intimation. The Assessing Officer has the discretion to extend the time period
beyond 15 days, on an application made by the assessee in this behalf. The
period of 15 days will have to be reckoned from the date on which the
communication is served upon the assessee.
(3) If the defect is not rectified within the period of 15 days or such further
extended period, the return would be treated as an invalid return. The
consequential effect would be the same as if the assessee had failed to furnish
the return.
8.23
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(4) Where, however, the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of 15 days
or the further extended period, but before the assessment is made, the
Assessing Officer may condone the delay and treat the return as a valid return.
(5) A return of income would be regarded as defective unless the annexures,
statements and columns therein relating to computation of income
chargeable under each head of income, gross total income and total income
have been duly filled in.
(6) A return of income u/s 139 would also be regarded as defective if it is not
accompanied by proof of payment of taxes, whether by way of advance tax
or self-assessment tax.
12. FEE FOR DEFAULT IN FURNISHING RETURN OF
INCOME [SECTION 234F]
Where a person, who is required to furnish a return of income under section 139,
fails to do so within the prescribed time limit under section 139(1), he shall pay, by
way of fee, a sum of ` 5,000.
However, if the total income of the person does not exceed ` 5 lakhs, the fees
payable shall not exceed ` 1,000.
13. PERMANENT ACCOUNT NUMBER (PAN)
[SECTION 139A]
(1) Sub-section (1) requires the following persons mentioned in column (2), who
have not been allotted a permanent account number (PAN), to apply to the
Assessing Officer within the time specified in column (3) for the allotment of
a PAN –
(1) (2) (3)
Persons required to apply for PAN Time limit for making such
application (Rule 114)
(i) Every person, if his total income or the On or before 31st May of the
total income of any other person in assessment year for which
respect of which he is assessable under such income is assessable
the Act during any previous year exceeds
the maximum am ount which is not
chargeable to income-tax
(ii) Every person carrying on any business or Before the end of that
profession whose total sales, turnover or financial year.
gross receipts are or is likely to exceed
` 5 lakhs in any previous year
(iii) Every person being a resident, other than On or before 31st May of the
an individual, which enters into a immediately following
financial transaction of an amount financial year
aggregating to ` 2,50,000 or more in a
financial year
(iv) Every person who is a managing director, On or before 31st May of the
director, partner, trustee, author, immediately following
founder, karta, chief executive officer, financial year in which the
principal officer or office bearer of any person referred in (iii) enters
person referred in (iii) above or any into financial transaction
person competent to act on behalf of specified therein.
such person referred in (iii) above
Further, every person who has not been allotted a PAN and intends to enter
into such transaction as prescribed by the CBDT is also required to apply for
PAN to the Assessing Officer. Accordingly, Rule 114BA has been inserted to
prescribe the following transactions:
Person required to apply for Time limit for making
PAN [Rule 114BA] application for PAN [Rule 114]
(i) Every person, who intends to At least 7 days before the date
deposit cash in his one or more on which he intends to deposit
accounts with a banking cash over the specified limit, i.e.,
company, co-operative bank or ` 20 lakh or more.
post office, if the cash deposit or
the aggregate amount of cash
deposit in such accounts during
a financial year is ` 20 lakh or
more
(ii) Every person, who intends to At least 7 days before the date
withdraw cash from his one or on which he intends to withdraw
more accounts with a banking
8.25
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
company, co-operative bank or cash over the specified limit, i.e.,
post office, if the cash withdrawal ` 20 lakh or more.
or the aggregate amount of cash
withdrawal from such accounts
during a financial year is ` 20
lakh or more
(iii) Any person, who intends to open At least 7 days before the date
a current account or cash credit on which he intends to open
account with a banking company such account.
or a co-operative bank, or a post
Office
However, a person is not required to apply for PAN or quote PAN, in a case –
(a) where the person, making the deposit or withdrawal of an amount
otherwise than by way of cash as per (i) or (ii) above, or opening a current
account not being a cash credit account as per (iii) above, is a non-
resident (not being a company) or a foreign company;
(b) the transaction is entered into with an IFSC banking unit and
(c) such non-resident (not being a company) or the foreign company does
not have any income chargeable to tax in India.
(2) The Central Government is empowered to specify, by notification in the
Official Gazette, any class or classes of persons by whom tax is payable under
the Act or any tax or duty is payable under any other law for the time being
is force. Such persons are required to apply within such time as may be
mentioned in that notification to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a
PAN [Sub-section (1A)].
(3) For the purpose of collecting any information which may be useful for or
relevant to the purposes of the Act, the Central Government may notify any
class or classes of persons, and such persons shall within the prescribed time,
apply to the Assessing Officer for allotment of a PAN [Sub-section (1B)].
(4) The Assessing Officer, having regard to the nature of transactions as may be
prescribed, may also allot a PAN to any other person (whether any tax is
payable by him or not) in the manner and in accordance with the procedure
as may be prescribed [Sub-section (2)].
(5) Any person, other than th e persons mentioned in (1) or (4) above, may apply
to the Assessing Officer for the allotment of a PAN and the Assessing Officer
shall allot a PAN to such person immediately.
(6) Such PAN comprises of 10 alphanumeric characters.
(7) Quoting of PAN is mandatory in all documents pertaining to the following
prescribed transactions [Section 139A(5)]:
(a) in all returns to, or correspondence with, any income-tax authority;
(b) in all challans for the payment of any sum due under the Act;
(c) in all documents pertaining to such transactions entered into by him, as
may be prescribed by the CBDT in the interests of revenue. In this
connection, CBDT has notified the following transactions vide Rule
114B, namely:
S. Nature of transaction Value of transaction
No.
1. Sale or purchase of a motor vehicle or All such transactions
vehicle, as defined in the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 which requires
registration by a registering authority
under that Act, other than two
wheeled vehicles.
2. Opening an account [other than a time- All such transactions
deposit referred to at Sl. No.12 and a
Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account]
with a banking company or a co-
operative bank to which the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949 applies (including
any bank or banking institution referred
to in section 51 of that Act).
3. Making an application to any banking All such transactions
company or a co-operative bank to which
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies
(including any bank or banking institution
referred to in section 51 of that Act) or to
any other company or institution, for
issue of a credit or debit card.
8.27
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
4. Opening of a demat account with a All such transactions
depository, participant, custodian of
securities or any other person
registered under section 12(1A) of the
SEBI Act, 1992.
5. Payment to a hotel or restaurant against Payment in cash of an
a bill or bills at any one time. amount exceeding ` 50,000.
6. Payment in connection with travel to Payment in cash of an
any foreign country or payment for amount exceeding ` 50,000.
purchase of any foreign currency at
any one time.
7. Payment to a Mutual Fund for Amount exceeding ` 50,000
purchase of its units
8. Payment to a company or an Amount exceeding ` 50,000
institution for acquiring debentures or
bonds issued by it.
9. Payment to the Reserve Bank of India Amount exceeding ` 50,000
for acquiring bonds issued by it.
10. Deposit with a banking company or a Cash deposits exceeding
co-operative bank to which the ` 50,000 during any one day.
Banking Regulation Act, 1949, applies
(including any bank or banking
institution referred to in section 51 of
that Act); or
post office
11. Purchase of bank drafts or pay orders or Payment in cash of an
banker’s cheques from a banking amount exceeding ` 50,000
company or a co-operative bank to during any one day.
which the Banking Regulation Act, 1949
applies (including any bank or banking
institution referred to in section 51 of
that Act).
12. A time deposit with, - Amount exceeding ` 50,000
(i) a banking company or a co- or aggregating to more than
operative bank to which the ` 5 lakh during a financial
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 year.
applies (inclu ding any bank or
banking institution referred to in
section 51 of that Act);
(ii) a Post Office;
(iii) a Nidhi referred to in section 406
of the Companies Act, 2013; or
(iv) a non-banking financial company
which holds a certificate of
registration under section 45-IA of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934,
to hold or accept deposit from
public.
13. Payment for one or more pre-paid Payment in cash or by way
payment instruments, as defined in of a bank draft or pay order
the policy guidelines for issuance and or banker’s cheque of an
operation of pre-paid payment amount aggregating to
instruments issued by Reserve Bank of more than ` 50,000 in a
India under the Payment and financial year.
Settlement Systems Act, 2007, to a
banking company or a co-operative
bank to which the Banking Regulation
Act, 1949, applies (including any bank
or banking institution referred to in
section 51 of that Act) or to any other
company or institution.
14. Payment as life insurance premium to Amount aggregating to
an insurer as defined in the Insurance more than ` 50,000 in a
Act, 1938. financial year.
15. A contract for sale or purchase of Amount exceeding ` 1 lakh
securities (other than shares) as per transaction.
defined in section 2(h) of the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,
1956.
16. Sale or purchase, by any person, of Amount exceeding ` 1 lakh
shares of a company not listed in a per transaction.
recognised stock exchange.
8.29
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
17. Sale or purchase of any immovable Amount exceeding ` 10 lakh
property. or valued by stamp
valuation authority referred
to in section 50C at an
amount exceeding ` 10 lakh
18. Sale or purchase, by any person, of Amount exceeding ` 2 lakh
goods or services of any nature other per transaction
than those specified at Sl. No. 1 to 17
of this Table, if any.
Minor to quote PAN of parent or guardian
Where a person, entering into any transaction referred to in this rule, is a
minor and who does not have any income chargeable to income-tax, he shall
quote the PAN of his father or mother or guardian, as the case may be, in the
document pertaining to the said transaction.
Declaration by a person not having PAN
Any person, not being a company or a firm who does not have a PAN and who
enters into any transaction specified in this rule, shall make a declaration in
Form No.60 giving therein the particulars of such transaction either in paper
form or electronically under the electronic verification code in accordance
with the procedures, data structures, and standards specified by the Principal
Director General of Income-tax (Systems) or Director General of Income-tax
(Systems).
However, in case of a foreign company who does not have any income
chargeable to tax in India and does not have a PAN and enters into transaction
referred to at Sl. No. 2 or 12 of the above table, in an IFSC banking unit3, it has
to make a declaration in Form No. 60.
Non-applicability of Rule 114B
The provisions of this rule shall not apply to the following class or classes of
persons, namely:-
3 A financial institution defined under section 3(1)(c) of the IFSC Authority Act, 2019, that is
licensed or permitted by the IFSC to undertake permissible activities under the IFSC Authority
(Banking) Regulations, 2020.
(i) the Central Govern ment, the State Governments and the Consular
Offices;
(ii) the non-residents referred to in section 2(30) in respect of the
transactions other than a transaction referred to at Sl. No. 1 or 2 or 4 or
7 or 8 or 10 or 12 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 of the Table.
Meaning of certain phrases:
Phrase Inclusion
(1) Payment in Payment towards fare, or to a travel agent or a tour
connection operator, or to an authorized person as defined in
with travel section 2(c) of the FEMA, 1999
(2) Travel agent A person who makes arrangements for air, surface or
or tour maritime travel or provides services relating to
operator accommodation, tours, entertainment, passport, visa,
foreign exchange, travel related insurance or other
travel related services either severally or in package
(3) Time deposit Any deposit which is repayable on the expiry of a
fixed period.
(8) If there is a change in the address or in the name and nature of the business
of a person, on the basis of which PAN was allotted to him, he should intimate
such change to the Assessing Officer [Section 139A (5)(d)].
(9) Every person who receives any document relating to any transaction cited
above shall ensure that the PAN or the Aadhaar number is duly quoted in the
document.
(10) Intimation of PAN to person deducting or collecting tax at source
Every person who receives any amount from which tax has been deducted at
source shall intimate his PAN to the person responsible for deducting such
tax [Section 139A(5A)].
Similarly, every buyer or licensee or lessee referred to in section 206C shall
intimate his PAN to the person responsible for collecting such tax [Section
139A(5C)]
8.31
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(11) Quoting of PAN in certain documents
Where any amount has been paid after deducting tax at source, the person
deducting tax shall quote the PAN of the person to whom the amount was
paid in the following documents:
(i) in the statement furnished under section 192(2C) giving particulars of
perquisites or profits in lieu of salary provided to any employee;
(ii) in all certificates for tax deducted issued to the person to whom
payment is made;
(iii) in all returns prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered to any
income-tax authority in accordance with the provisions of section 206;
(iv) in all statements prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered in
accordance with the provisions of section 200(3) [Section 139A(5B)].
Also, every person collecting tax in accordance with the provisions of section
206C shall quote PAN of every buyer or licensee or lessee in the following
documents:
(i) in all certificates issued for tax collected in accordance with the
provisions of section 206C(5);
(ii) in all returns prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered to any
income-tax authority in accordance with the provisions of section
206C(5A)/(5B);
(iii) in all statements prepared and delivered or caused to be delivered in
accordance with the provisions of section 206C(3) [Sub-section (5D)].
(12) Requirement to intimate PAN and quote PAN not to apply to certain
persons
Section 139A(5A)/(5B) shall not apply to a person who –
(i) does not have taxable income or
(ii) who is not required to obtain PAN
if such person furnishes a declaration under section 197A in the prescribed
form and manner that the tax on his estimated total income for that previous
year will be Nil.
(13) Inter-changeability of P AN with the Aadhaar number
Every person who is required to furnish or intimate or quote his PAN may
furnish or intimate or quote his Aadhaar Number in lieu of the PAN, if he
- has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar number
- has been allotted a PAN and has intimated his Aadhaar number to
prescribed authority in accordance with the requirement contained in
section 139AA(2).
PAN would be allotted in prescribed manner to a person who has not been
allotted a PAN but possesses Aadhaar number.
Accordingly, the CBDT has, vide Notification No. 59/2019, dated 30.8.2019,
provide that any person, who has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the
Aadhaar number and has furnished or intimated or quoted his Aadhaar
number in lieu of the PAN, shall be deemed to have applied for allotment of
PAN and he shall not be required to apply or submit any documents.
Further, any person, who has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the
Aadhaar number may apply for allotment of the PAN under section
139A(1)/(1A)/(3) by intimating his Aadhaar number and he shall not be
required to apply or submit any documents.
(14) Quoting and authentication of PAN or Aadhaar number
(a) Every person entering into such prescribed transactions is required to
quote his PAN or Aadhaar number, as the case may be, in the
documents pertaining to such transactions and also authenticate such
PAN or Aadhaar number in the prescribed manner [Section 139A(6A)].
(b) Every person receiving such document relating to transactions referred
to in (a) has to ensure that PAN or Aadhaar number has been duly
quoted in such document and also ensure that such PAN or Aadhaar
number is so authenticated [Section 139A(6B)].
Accordingly, Rule 114BB has been inserted to prescribe that every person has
to, at the time of entering into a transaction specified in column (2) of the
Table below, quote his permanent account number or Aadhaar number, as
the case may be, in documents pertaining to such transaction, and every
person specified in column (3) of the said Table, who receives such document,
has to ensure that the said number has been duly quoted and authenticated:
8.33
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(1) (2) (3)
S. No. Nature of transaction Person
1. Cash deposit or deposits A bank or a co-
aggregating to ` 20 lakhs or more in operative bank or Post
a financial year, in one or more Master General of a
account of a person with a bank or a Post Office.
co-operative bank or Post Office.
2. Cash withdrawal or withdrawals A bank or a co-
aggregating to ` 20 lakhs or more in operative bank or Post
a financial year, in one or more Master General of a
account of a person with a bank or a Post Office.
co-operative bank or Post Office
3. Opening of a current account or cash A bank or a co-
credit account by a person with a operative bank or Post
bank or a co-operative bank or Post Master General of a
Office Post Office.
Note 1 – Quoting of PAN or Aadhaar number is, however, not required in
case where the person depositing money as per Sl. No.1 or withdrawing
money as per Sl. No.2 or opening a current account or cash credit account as
per Sl. No.3 is the Central Government, the State Government or the Consular
Office.
Note 2- Quoting of PAN or Aadhaar number is also not required in a case
a) where the person, making the deposit or withdrawal of an amount
otherwise than by way of cash as per Sl. No.1 or Sl. No.2 above, or
opening a current account not being a cash credit account as per Sl. No.3
above, is a non-resident (not being a company) or a foreign
company;
b) the transaction is entered into with an IFSC banking unit; and
c) such non-resident (not being a company) or the foreign company does
not have any income chargeable to tax in India
(15) Power to make rules
The CBDT is empowered to make rules with regard to the following:
(a) the form and mann er in which an application for PAN may be made and
the particulars to be given therein;
(b) the categories of transactions in relation to which PAN or the Aadhaar
number, as the case may be, is required to be quoted on the related
documents;
(c) the categories of documents pertaining to business or profession in
which PAN or the Aadhaar number, as the case may be, shall be quoted
by every person;
(d) the class or classes of persons to whom the provisions of this section
shall not apply;
(e) the form and manner in which a person who has not been allotted a
PAN shall make a declaration;
(f) the manner in which PAN or the Aadhaar number, as the case may be,
shall be quoted for transactions cited in (b) above;
(g) the time and manner in which such transactions cited in (b) above shall
be intimated to the prescribed authority.
(16) Meaning of certain terms
Term Meaning
(i) Aadhaar An identification number issued to an individual by
number the Authority on receipt of the demographic
information and biometric information after
verifying the information by the authority. It
includes any alternative virtual identity generated
by the Authority in the prescribed manner.
(ii) Authentication The process by which the PAN or Aadhaar
number along with demographic information or
biometric information of an individual is
submitted to the income-tax authority or such
other prescribed authority or agency for its
verification and such authority or agency verifies
the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis
of information available with it.
8.35
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(17) Penalty for failure to comply with the provisions of section 139A
[Section 272B]
Section Default Penalty
272B(1) Failure to comply with the provisions of section ` 10,000
139A
272B(2) Failure to quote PAN/Aadhaar number in any ` 10,000 for
document referred to in section 139A(5)(c) each such
default
Failure to intimate PAN/Aadhaar number as
required by section 139A(5A)/(5C)
Knowingly quoting or intimating a number which is false
272B(2A) Failure to quote PAN/Aadhaar Number in ` 10,000 for
documents referred to in section 139A(6A) or each such
authenticate such number in accordance with the default
provisions contained therein
272B(2B) (i) Failure to ensure that PAN/Aadhaar Number is ` 10,000 for
duly quoted in the documents relating to each such
transactions referred to in section 139A(5)(c) or default
section 139A(6A)
(ii) Failure to ensure that PAN/Aadhaar Number
has been duly authenticated in respect of
transactions referred to under section 139A(6A)
Note – It is necessary to give an opportunity to be heard to the person on
whom the penalty under section 272B is proposed to be imposed.
14. QUOTING OF AADHAAR NUMBER
[SECTION 139AA]
(1) Mandatory quoting of Aadhaar Number
Every person who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number is required to
mandatorily quote Aadhaar Number:
(a) in the application form for allotment of Permanent Account Number
(PAN)
(b) in the return of income
Quoting of Aadhaar N umber mandatory in returns filed on or after
1.4.2019 [Circular No. 6/2019 dated 31.03.2019]
As per section 139AA(1)(ii), with effect from 01.07.2017, every person who is
eligible to obtain Aadhaar number has to quote Aadhaar number in the return
of income.
The Apex Court in a series of judgments has upheld the validity of section
139AA. Consequently, with effect from 01.04.2019, the CBDT has clarified that
it is mandatory to quote Aadhaar number while filing the return of income
unless specifically exempted as per any notification issued under section
139AA(3) [detailed in point no. (5) in the next page]. Thus, returns being filed
either electronically or manually on or after 1.4.2019 cannot be filed without
quoting the Aadhaar number.
(2) Quoting of Enrolment Id, where person does not have Aadhaar Number
If a person does not have Aadhaar Number, he is required to quote Enrolment
ID of Aadhaar application form issued to him at the time of enrolment in the
application form for allotment of Permanent Account Number (PAN) or in the
return of income furnished by him.
Enrolment ID means a 28 digit Enrolment Identification Number issued to a
resident at the time of enrolment.
However, w.e.f. 1st October, 2024, the option of quoting Enrolment ID of
Aadhaar application for allotment of Permanent Account Number (PAN) or in
the return of income furnished is discontinued.
Further, a person who has been allotted permanent account number on the
basis of Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form filed before 1st October,
2024 has to intimate his Aadhaar Number, on or before a notified date, to the
prescribed authority in the prescribed manner [Section 139AA(2A)].
(3) Intimation of Aadhaar Number to prescribed Authority
Every person who has been allotted Permanent Account Number (PAN) as on
1st July, 2017, and who is eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number, shall intimate
his Aadhaar Number to prescribed authority on or before 31st March, 2022.
Notwithstanding the last date of intimating/linking of Aadhaar Number with
PAN being 31.03.2022, it is clarified that w.e.f. 01.04.2019, it is mandatory to
quote and link Aadhaar number while filing the return of income, either
8.37
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
manually or electronically, unless specifically exempted in cases detailed in
point (5) below.
(4) Consequences of failure to intimate Aadhaar Number
If a person fails to intimate the Aadhaar Number, the permanent account
Number (PAN) allotted to such person shall be made inoperative after the
date so notified in the prescribed manner.
Accordingly, Rule 114AAA specifies the manner of making permanent
account number inoperative.
Sub-Rule Provision
(1) If a person, who has been allotted PAN as on
1st July, 2017 and is required to intimate his Aadhaar number
under section 139AA(2), has failed to intimate the same on or
before 31st March, 2022, the PAN of such person would become
inoperative and he would be liable for payment of fee in
accordance with section 234H read with Rule 114(5A) i.e.,
` 1,0004.
(2) Where such person who has not intimated his Aadhaar number
on or before 31st March, 2022, has intimated his Aadhaar
number under section 139AA(2) after 31st March, 2022, after
payment of fee specified in section 234H read with Rule
114(5A), his PAN would become operative within 30 days
from the date of intimation of Aadhaar number.
(3) A person, whose PAN has become inoperative, would be liable
for following further consequences for the period commencing
from the date as specified under (4) below till the date it
becomes operative –
(i) no refund of any amount of tax or part thereof, due under
the provisions of the Act;
(ii) interest would not be payable on such refund for the
period, beginning with the date specified under (4) below
and ending with the date on which it becomes operative;
4 The fee was ` 500 if Aadhaar number was intimated on or before 30.06.2022
(iii) where tax is deductible at source in case of such person,
such tax shall be deducted at higher rate, in accordance
with provisions of section 206AA;
(iv) where tax is collectible at source in case of such person,
such tax shall be collected at higher rate, in accordance
with provisions of section 206CC.
(4) The consequences in (3) above would be effective from the
date specified by the Board i.e., 1.7.2023 [Circular No. 3/2023
dated 28th March, 2023]
(5) Clarification on consequences of PAN becoming inoperative
These consequences would be with effect from 1.7.2023 and continue till the
PAN becomes operative. A fee of ` 1,000 has to be paid to make the PAN
operative by intimating the Aadhaar number.
The consequences of PAN becoming inoperative would not be applicable to
those persons who have been provided exemption from intimating Aadhaar
number detailed in point (6) below.
(6) Provision not to apply to certain persons or class of persons
The provisions of section 139AA relating to quoting of Aadhaar Number
would, however, not apply to such person or class or classes of persons or
any State or part of any State as may be notified by the Central Government.
Accordingly, the Central Government has, vide Notification No. 37/2017
dated 11.05.2017 effective from 01.07.2017, notified that the provisions of
section 139AA relating to quoting of Aadhaar Number would not apply to an
individual who does not possess the Aadhaar number or Enrolment ID and is:
(i) residing in Assam, Jammu & Kashmir and Meghalaya;
(ii) a non-resident as per Income-tax Act, 1961;
(iii) of the age of 80 years or more at any time during the previous year;
(iv) not a citizen of India
8.39
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
15. SCHEME FOR SUBMISSION OF RETURNS
THROUGH TAX RETURN PREPARERS
[SECTION 139B]
(1) This section provides that, for the purpose of enabling any specified class or
classes of persons to prepare and furnish their returns of income, the CBDT
may notify a scheme to provide that such persons may furnish their returns
of income through a Tax Return Preparer authorised to act as such under the
Scheme.
(2) The Tax Return Preparer shall assist the persons furnishing the return in a
manner that will be specified in the Scheme and shall also affix his signature
on such return.
(3) A Tax Return Preparer means any individual, other than
(i) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the assessee maintains a
current account or has other regular dealings.
(ii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India.
(iii) an accountant
(iv) an employee of the ‘specified class or classes of persons’.
who has been authorized to act as a Tax Return Preparer under the Scheme.
(4) The “specified class or classes of persons” for this purpose means any
person other than a company or a person whose accounts are required to be
audited under section 44AB (tax audit) or under any other existing law, who
is required to furnish a return of income under the Act.
(5) The Scheme notified under the said section may provide for the following -
(i) the manner in which and the period for which the Tax Return Preparers
shall be authorised,
(ii) the educational and other qualifications to be possessed, and the
training and other conditions required to be fulfilled, by a person to act
as a Tax Return Preparer,
(ii) the code of conduct for the Tax Return Preparers,
(iii) the duties and obligations of the Tax Return Preparers,
(iv) the circumstances under which the authorisation given to a Tax Return
Preparer may be wi thdrawn, and
(v) any other relevant matter as may be specified by the Scheme.
(6) Accordingly, the CBDT has, in exercise of the powers conferred by this section,
framed the Tax Return Preparer Scheme, 2006, which came into force from
1.12.2006.
Particulars Contents
Applicability of the The scheme is applicable to all eligible persons.
scheme
Eligible person Any person being an individual or a Hindu
undivided family.
Tax Return Preparer Any individual who has been issued a "Tax Return
Preparer Certificate" and a "unique identification
number" under this Scheme by the Partner
Organisation to carry on the profession of
preparing the returns of income in accordance
with the Scheme.
However, the following person are not entitled to
act as Tax Return Preparer:
(i) any officer of a scheduled bank with which
the assessee maintains a current account or
has other regular dealings.
(ii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to
practice in any civil court in India.
(iii) an accountant.
Educational An individual, who holds a bachelor degree from
qualification for Tax a recognised Indian University or institution, or
Return Preparers has passed the intermediate level examination
conducted by the Institute of Chartered
Accountants of India or the Institute of Company
Secretaries of India or the Institute of Cost
Accountants of India, shall be eligible to act as
Tax Return Preparer.
Preparation of and An eligible person may, at his option, furnish his
furnishing the Return return of income under section 139 for any
of Income by the Tax assessment year after getting it prepared
Return Preparer through a Tax Return Preparer:
8.41
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
However, the following eligible person (an
individual or a HUF) cannot furnish a return of
income for an assessment year through a Tax
Return Preparer:
(i) who is carrying out business or profession
during the previous year and accounts of the
business or profession for that previous year
are required to be audited under section
44AB or under any other law for the time
being in force; or
(ii) who is not a resident in India during the previous
year.
An eligible person cannot furnish a revised return
of income for any assessment year through a Tax
Return Preparer unless he has furnished the
original return of income for that assessment
year through such or any other Tax Return
Preparer.
Note - It may be noted that as per section 139B(3), an employee of the “specified
class or classes of persons” is not authorized to act as a Tax Return Preparer.
Therefore, it follows that employees of companies and persons whose accounts are
required to be audited under section 44AB or any other law for the time being in
force (since they are not falling in the category of specified class or classes of
persons), are eligible to act as Tax Return Preparers.
ILLUSTRATION 3
Mrs. Hetal, an individual engaged in the business of Beauty Parlour, has got her books
of account for the financial year ended on 31st March, 2025 audited under section
44AB. Her total income for the A.Y. 2025-26 is ` 6,35,000. She wants to furnish her
return of income for A.Y. 2025-26 through a tax return preparer. Can she do so?
SOLUTION
Section 139B provides a scheme for submission of return of income for any
assessment year through a Tax Return Preparer. However, it is not applicable to
persons whose books of account are required to be audited under section 44AB.
Therefore, Mrs. Hetal cannot furnish her return of income for A.Y.2025-26 through
a Tax Return Preparer.
16. PERSONS AUTHORISED TO VERIFY RETURN OF
INCOME [SECTION 140]
This section specifies the persons who are authorized to verify the return of income
under section 139.
Assessee Circumstance Authorised Persons
1. Individual (i) In circumstances not - the individual himself
covered under (ii), (iii)
& (iv) below
(ii) where he is absent - the individual himself; or
from India - any person duly
authorised by him in this
behalf holding a valid
power of attorney from
the individual (Such
power of attorney should
be attached to the return
of income)
(iii) where he is mentally - his guardian; or
incapacitated from - any other person
attending to his competent to act on his
affairs behalf
(iv) where, for any other - any person duly authorised
reason, it is not by him in this behalf
possible for the indi- holding a valid power of
vidual to verify the attorney from the
return individual, which should be
attached to the return of
income.
2. Hindu (i) in circumstances not - the karta
Undivided covered under (ii) and
Family (iii) below
(ii) where the karta is - any other adult member
absent from India of the HUF
(iii) where the karta is - any other adult member
mentally
8.43
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
incapacitated from of the HUF
attending to his
affairs
3. Company (i) in circumstances not - the managing director of
covered under (i) to the company
(vi) below
(ii)
(a) where for any
unavoidable reason any director of the
such managing company or
director is not able to
any other person as may
verify the return; or
be prescribed for this
(b) where there is no purpose
managing director
(iii) where the company is - the managing director of
not resident in India the company (or)
- a person who holds a valid
power of attorney from
such company to do so
(such power of attorney
should be attached to the
return).
(iv)
(a) Where the company is - Liquidator
being wound up
(whether under the
orders of a court or
otherwise); or
(b) where any person has - Liquidator
been appointed as
the receiver of any
assets of the company
(v) Where the - the principal officer of the
management of the company
company has been
taken over by the
Central Government
or any State
Government under
any law
(vi) Where an application - insolvency professional
for corporate appointed by such
insolvency resolution Adjudicating Authority
process has been
admitted by the
Adjudicating Authority
under the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code,
2016.
4. Firm (i) in circumstances not - the managing partner of
covered under (ii) the firm
below
(ii)
(a) where for any - any partner of the firm, not
unavoidable reason being a minor
such managing
partner is not able to
verify the return; or - any partner of the firm, not
(b) where there is no being a minor
managing partner.
5. LLP (i) in circumstances not - Designated partner
covered under (ii)
below
(ii)
(a) where for any
unavoidable reason any partner of the LLP or
such designated any other person as may be
partner is not able to prescribed for this purpose
verify the return; or
(b) where there is no
designated partner.
6. Local - - the principal officer
authority
8.45
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
7. Political - - the chief executive officer of
party 5 such party (whether he is
known as secretary or by any
other designation)
8. Any other - - any member of the
association association or the principal
officer of such association
9. Any other - - that person or some other
person person competent to act on
his behalf.
Any other person in case of company and LLP - The CBDT has, vide Notification
No. 93/2021 dated 18.8.2021, specified that “any other person” referred to in
section 140(c) and 140(cd) for company and LLP, respectively, shall be the person,
appointed by the Adjudicating Authority (i.e., National Company Law Tribunal
constituted under section 408 of the Companies Act, 2013) for discharging the
duties and functions of an interim resolution professional, a resolution professional,
or a liquidator, as the case may be, under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code,
2016 and the rules and regulations made thereunder.
5 Referred to in section 139(4B), which will be dealt with at the Final level.
LET US RECAPITULATE
Section Particulars
139(1) Assessees required to file return of income compulsorily
(i) Companies and firms (whether having profit or loss or nil
income);
(ii) a person, being a resident other than not ordinarily resident,
having any asset (including any financial interest in any entity)
located outside India held as a beneficial owner or beneficiary
or who has a signing authority in any account located outside
India, whether or not having income chargeable to tax;
(iii) Individuals, HUF, AOPs or BOIs and artificial juridical persons
whose total income before giving effect to the provisions of
Chapter VI-A and sections 54, 54B, 54D, 54EC or 54F exceeds
the basic exemption limit.
(iv) Any person other than a company or a firm, who is not
required to furnish a return under section 139(1), who during
the previous year –
- has deposited more than ` 1 crore in one or more
current accounts maintained with a banking company or
a co-operative bank; or
- has incurred expenditure of more than ` 2 lakh for
himself or any other person for travel to a foreign
country; or
- has incurred expenditure of more than ` 1 lakh towards
consumption of electricity; or
- fulfils such other conditions as may be prescribed
Accordingly, the CBDT has notified that any person other than
a company or a firm, who is not required to furnish a return
under section 139(1) has to file their return of income on or
before due date -
(i) if his total sales, turnover or gross receipts, as the case may
be, in the business > ` 60 lakhs during the previous year;
or
8.47
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
(ii) if his total gross receipts in profession > ` 10 lakhs
during the previous year; or
(iii) if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous year,
in the case of the person, is ` 25,000 or more; or
However, a resident individual who is of the age of 60
years or more, at any time during the relevant previous
year, if the aggregate of TDS and TCS during the previous
year, in his case, is ` 50,000 or more
(iv) the deposit in one or more savings bank account of the
person, in aggregate, is ` 50 lakhs or more during the
previous year.
Due date of filing return of income
(i) 31st October of the assessment year, in case the assessee
(other than an assessee referred to in (ii) below) is:
(a) a company;
(b) a person (other than company) whose accounts are
required to be audited; or
(c) a partner of a firm whose accounts are required to be
audited.
(ii) 30th November of the assessment year, in the case of an
assessee including the partners of the firm being such
assessee who is required to furnish a report referred to in
section 92E.
(iii) 31st July of the assessment year, in case of any other assessee.
139(3) Return of loss
An assessee can carry forward or set off his/its losses provided he/it
has filed his/its return under section 139(3), within the due date
specified under section 139(1).
Exceptions
Loss from house property and unabsorbed depreciation can be
carried forward for set-off even though return has not been filed
before the due date.
139(4) Belated Return
A return of income for any previous year, which has not been
furnished within the time allowed u/s 139(1), may be furnished at
any time before the:
(i) three mont hs prior to the end of the relevant assessment year
(i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
(ii) completion of the assessment,
whichever is earlier.
139(5) Revised Return
If any omission or any wrong statement is discovered in a return
furnished u/s 139(1) or belated return u/s 139(4), a revised return
may be furnished by the assessee at any time before the:
(i) three months prior to the end of the relevant assessment year
(i.e., 31.12.2025 for P.Y. 2024-25); or
(ii) completion of assessment,
whichever is earlier.
Thus, belated return can also be revised.
234A Interest for default in furnishing return of income
Interest under section 234A is payable where an assessee furnishes
the return of income after the due date or does not furnish the
return of income.
Assessee shall be liable to pay simple interest @1% per month or part
of the month for the period commencing from the date immediately
following the due date and ending on the following dates –
Circumstances Ending on the following dates
Where the return is the date of furnishing of the return
furnished after due date
Where no return is the date of completion of
furnished assessment
However, where the assessee has paid taxes in full on or before the
due date, interest under section 234A is not leviable.
140A Self-Assessment tax
Where any tax is payable on the basis of any return required to be
furnished under section 139, after taking into account –
(i) the amount of tax, already paid,
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89
(iv) any tax credit claimed to be set-off in accordance with the
provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised
8.49
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A); and
(v) any tax and interest payable as per the provisions of section
191(2)
the assessee shall be liable to pay such tax together with interest
and fee payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in
furnishing the return or any default or delay in payment of advance
tax before furnishing the return.
Where the amount paid by the assessee under section 140A(1) falls
short of the aggregate of the tax, interest and fee as aforesaid, the
amount so paid shall first be adjusted towards the fee payable and
thereafter, towards interest and the balance shall be adjusted
towards the tax payable.
139(8A) Updated Return
Any person may, whether or not he has furnished a return under
section 139(1) or belated return under section 139(4) or revised
return under section 139(5) for that assessment year, furnish an
updated return of his income or the income of any other person in
respect of which he is assessable, for the previous year relevant to
the assessment year at any time within 24 months from the end of
the relevant assessment year.
The provisions of updated return would not apply, if the updated
return of such person for that assessment year –
(i) is a loss return; or
(ii) has the effect of decreasing the total tax liability determined
on the basis of return furnished under section 139(1) or section
139(4) or section 139(5); or
(iii) results in refund or increases the refund due on the basis of return
furnished under section 139(1) or section 139(4) or section 139(5).
No updated return can be furnished by any person for the relevant
assessment year, where –
(a) an updated return has been furnished by him under this sub-
section for the relevant assessment year; or
(b) any proceeding for assessment or reassessment or
recomputation or revision of income is pending or has been
completed for the relevant assessment year in his case; or
(c) he is such p erson or belongs to such class of persons, as may
be notified by the CBDT.
140B Tax on Updated Return
Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before
furnishing updated return of income if no return is furnished
earlier - Where no return of income has been furnished by an
assessee and tax is payable, on the basis of updated return to be
furnished by such assessee under section 139(8A), the assessee
would be liable to pay such tax together with interest and fee
payable under any provision of this Act for any delay in furnishing
the return or any default or delay in payment of advance tax, along
with the payment of additional tax computed under section 140B(3),
before furnishing the return.
The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of
such tax, additional income-tax, interest and fee.
The tax payable is to be computed after taking into account the
following -
(i) the amount of tax, if any, already paid, as advance tax
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source
(iii) any relief of tax claimed under section 89; and
(iv) any tax credit claimed to set-off in accordance with the
provisions of section 115JD, in case the assessee has exercised
the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
In a case, where no earlier return has been furnished, the interest
payable under section 234A has to be computed on the amount of
the tax on the total income as declared in the updated return under
section 139(8A), in accordance with the provisions of section
140A(1A).
Payment of tax, additional tax, interest and fee before
furnishing updated return of income if return is furnished
earlier
Where, return of income under section 139(1) or 139(4) or 139(5)
has been furnished by an assessee and tax is payable, on the basis
of updated return to be furnished by such assessee under section
139(8A), the assessee would be liable to pay such tax together with
interest payable under any provision of this Act for any default or
delay in payment of advance tax, along with the payment of
8.51
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
additional tax computed u/s 140B(3), as reduced by the amount of
interest paid under the provisions of this Act in the earlier return,
before furnishing the return.
The updated return shall be accompanied by proof of payment of
such tax, additional income-tax and interest.
The tax payable has to be computed after taking into account the
following -
(i) the amount of relief or tax referred to in section 140A(1), the
credit for which has been taken in the earlier return
(ii) the tax deducted or collected at source, in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter XVII-B, on any income which is
subject to such deduction or collection and which is taken into
account in computing total income and which has not been
included in the earlier return
(iii) any tax credit claimed, to set-off in accordance with the
provisions of section 115JD, which has not been claimed in
the earlier return, in case the assessee has exercised the
option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A).
The aforesaid tax would be increased by the amount of refund, if
any, issued in respect of such earlier return.
Additional income-tax payable at the time of updated return
The additional tax payable at the time of furnishing the updated
return under section 139(8A) would be –
(i) 25% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined
above, if such return is furnished after expiry of the time
available under section 139(4) or 139(5) and before completion
of the period of 12 months from the end of the relevant
assessment year; or
(ii) 50% of aggregate of tax and interest payable, as determined
above, if such return is furnished after the expiry of 12 months
from the end of the relevant A.Y. but before completion of the
period of 24 months from the end of the relevant A.Y.
139(9) Defective Return
Where the Assessing Officer considers that the return of income is
defective, he may intimate the defect to the assessee and give him
an opportunity to rectify the defect within 15 days from the date of
intimation or wi thin such further period, which, the Assessing
Officer may allow in his discretion on an application made by the
assessee in this behalf.
If the defect is not rectified within such period, the return would be
treated as an invalid return. Consequently, the provisions of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 would apply as if the assessee had failed to
furnish the return.
However, where the assessee rectifies the defect after the expiry of
15 days or further period allowed by the Assessing Officer but
before the assessment is made, the Assessing Officer may condone
the delay and treat the return as a valid return.
234F Fee for default in furnishing return of income
Where a person who is required to furnish a return of income under
section 139, fails to do so within the prescribed time limit under
section 139(1), he shall pay, by way of fee, a sum of ` 5,000.
However, if the total income of the person does not exceed ` 5
lakhs, the fees payable shall not exceed ` 1,000
139A Permanent Account Number (PAN)
Quoting of PAN is mandatory in all documents pertaining to the
following prescribed transactions :
(a) in all returns to, or correspondence with, any income-tax
authority;
(b) in all challans for the payment of any sum due under the Act;
(c) in all documents pertaining to such transactions entered into
by him, as may be prescribed by the CBDT in the interests of
revenue. For example, sale or purchase of a motor vehicle,
payment in cash of an amount exceeding ` 50,000 to a hotel
against a bill or bills at any one time, etc.
Inter-changeability of PAN with the Aadhaar number
Every person who is required to furnish or intimate or quote his PAN
may furnish or intimate or quote his Aadhaar Number in lieu of the
PAN if he
- has not been allotted a PAN but possesses the Aadhaar
number
- has been allotted a PAN and has intimated his Aadhaar
number to prescribed authority in accordance with the
requirement contained in section 139AA(2).
8.53
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
139AA Quoting of Aadhaar Number
To be quoted by every person on or after 1.7.2017 in the application
for allotment of PAN and in return of income.
If a person does not have Aadhaar Number, the Enrolment ID of
Aadhaar application form issued to him at the time of enrolment
shall be quoted.
However, w.e.f. 1st October, 2024, the option of quoting Enrolment ID
of Aadhaar application for allotment of PAN or in the return of
income furnished is discontinued.
Further, a person who has been allotted PAN on the basis of
Enrolment ID of Aadhaar application form filed before 1st October,
2024 has to intimate his Aadhaar Number, on or before a notified
date, to the prescribed authority in the prescribed manner.
Every person who has been allotted PAN as on 1.7.2017 and who is
eligible to obtain Aadhaar Number, has to intimate his Aadhaar
Number to the prescribed authority on or before 31.3.2022.
If such person has failed to intimate the same on or before 31st
March, 2022, the PAN of such person would become inoperative
and he would be liable for payment of fee in accordance with
section 234H read with Rule 114(5A) i.e., ` 1,000.
Where such person who has not intimated his Aadhaar number on
or before 31st March, 2022, has intimated his Aadhaar number
under section 139AA(2) after 31st March, 2022, after payment of fee
specified in section 234H read with Rule 114(5A), his PAN would
become operative within 30 days from the date of intimation of
Aadhaar number.
The consequences of inoperative PAN would be effective from the
date specified by the Board i.e., 1.7.2023 [Circular No. 3/2023 dated
28th March, 2023]
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. State with reasons whether you agree or disagree with the following
statements:
(a) Return of income of Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) could be verified
by any partner.
(b) Time limit for filing return under section 139(1) in the case of Mr. A
having total turnover of ` 160 lakhs (` 100 lakhs received in cash) for the
year ended 31.03.2025 whether or not declaring presumptive income
under section 44AD, is 31st October, 2025.
2. Mr. Vineet exercised the option of shifting out of the default tax regime provided
under section 115BAC(1A) and submits his return of income under the optional
tax regime (i.e., the normal provisions of the Act) on 12-09-2025 for A.Y. 2025-
26 consisting of income under the head “Salaries”, “Income from house
property” and bank interest. On 21-12-2025, he realized that he had not
claimed deduction under section 80TTA in respect of his interest income on the
Savings Bank Account. He wants to revise his return of income. Can he do so?
Examine. Would your answer be different if he discovered this omission on 21-
03-2026?
3. Examine with reasons, whether the following statements are true or false, with
regard to the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961:
(i) The Assessing Officer has the power, inter alia, to allot PAN to any person
by whom no tax is payable.
(ii) Where the Karta of a HUF is absent from India, the return of income can
be verified by any male member of the family.
4. Explain the term “return of loss” under the Income-tax Act, 1961. Can any loss
be carried forward even if return of loss has not been filed as required?
5. Mr. Aakash has undertaken certain transactions during the F.Y.2024-25, which
are listed below. You are required to identify the transactions in respect of
which quoting of PAN is mandatory in the related documents –
8.55
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
S. No. Transaction
1. Payment of life insurance premium of ` 45,000 in the
F.Y.2024-25 by account payee cheque to LIC for insuring life of
self and spouse
2. Payment of ` 1,00,000 to a five-star hotel for stay for 5 days with
family, out of which ` 60,000 was paid in cash
3. Payment of ` 80,000 by ECS through bank account for acquiring
the debentures of A Ltd., an Indian company
4. Payment of ` 95,000 by account payee cheque to Thomas Cook
for travel to Dubai for 3 days to visit relatives
5. Applied to SBI for issue of credit card.
ANSWERS
1. (a) Disagree
The return of income of LLP should be verified by a designated partner.
Any other partner can verify the Return of Income of LLP only in the
following cases:-
(i) where for any unavoidable reason such designated partner is not
able to verify the return, or,
(ii) where there is no designated partner.
(b) Disagree
In case Mr. A offers his business income as per the presumptive taxation
provisions of section 44AD (` 11.60 lakhs or more), then, the due date
under section 139(1) for filing of return of income for the year ended
31.03.2025, shall be 31st July, 2025.
In case, Mr. A wants to declare business income lower than ` 11.60
lakhs, he has to get his accounts audited under section 44AB, since his
turnover exceeds ` 1 crore, in which case, the due date for filing return
would be 31st October, 2025.
2. Since Mr. Vineet has income only under the heads “Salaries”, “Income from
house property” and “Income from other sources”, he does not fall under the
category of a person wh ose accounts are required to be audited under the
Income-tax Act, 1961 or any other law in force. Therefore, the due date of
filing return for A.Y.2025-26 under section 139(1), in his case, is 31st July, 2025.
Since Mr. Vineet had submitted his return only on 12.9.2025, the said return
is a belated return under section 139(4).
As per section 139(5), a return furnished under section 139(1) or a belated
return u/s 139(4) can be revised. Thus, a belated return under section 139(4)
can also be revised. Therefore, Mr. Vineet can revise the return of income filed
by him under section 139(4) in December 2025, to claim deduction under
section 80TTA, since the time limit for filing a revised return is three months
prior to the end of the relevant assessment year, which is 31.12.2025.
However, he cannot revise return had he discovered this omission only on 21-
03-2026, since it is beyond 31.12.2025.
3. (i) True: Section 139A(2) provides that the Assessing Officer may, having
regard to the nature of transactions as may be prescribed, also allot a
PAN to any other person, whether any tax is payable by him or not, in
the manner and in accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed.
(ii) False: Section 140(b) provides that where the Karta of a HUF is absent
from India, the return of income can be verified by any other adult
member of the family; such member can be a male or female member.
4. A return of loss is a return which shows certain losses. Section 80 provides
that the losses specified therein cannot be carried forward, unless such losses
are determined in pursuance of return filed under the provisions of section
139(3).
Section 139(3) states that to carry forward the losses specified therein, the
return should be filed within the time specified in section 139(1).
Following losses are covered by section 139(3):
• business loss to be carried forward under section 72(1),
• speculation business loss to be carried forward under section 73(2),
• loss from specified business to be carried forward under section 73A(2),
in case the assessee has exercised the option of shifting out of the
default tax regime provided under section 115BAC(1A).
8.57
INCOME AND SELF ASSESSMENT
• loss under the head “Capital Gains” to be carried forward under section
74(1); and
• loss incurred in the activity of owning and maintaining race horses to
be carried forward under section 74A(3)
However, loss from house property to be carried forward under section 71B
and unabsorbed depreciation under section 32 can be carried forward even
if return of loss has not been filed as required under section 139(3).
5.
Transaction Is quoting of PAN mandatory
in related documents?
1. Payment of life insurance premium No, since the amount paid does
of ` 45,000 in the F.Y.2024-25 by not exceed ` 50,000 in the
account payee cheque to LIC for F.Y.2024-25.
insuring life of self and spouse
2. Payment of ` 1,00,000 to a five-star Yes, since the amount paid in
hotel for stay for 5 days with cash exceeds ` 50,000
family, out of which ` 60,000 was
paid in cash
3. Payment of ` 80,000, by ECS Yes, since the amount paid for
through bank account, for acquiring debentures exceeds
acquiring the debentures of A Ltd., ` 50,000. Mode of payment is
an Indian company not relevant in this case.
4. Payment of ` 95,000 by account No, since the amount was paid
payee cheque to Thomas Cook for by account payee cheque,
travel to Dubai for 3 days to visit quoting of PAN is not mandatory
relatives even though the payment
exceeds ` 50,000
5. Applied to SBI for issue of credit Yes, quoting of PAN is
card. mandatory on making an
application to a banking
company for issue of credit card.
This section comprises of Chapter 9 Income-tax liability – Computation and
Optimisation. It involves integration of the provisions dealt with in all the earlier
chapters to compute the total income and tax payable by an individual. The
following is the procedure for computing total income and tax payable by an
individual –
Step Step-by-step Procedure
1 Determine his residential status to find out the scope of his total income.
2 Classify the income chargeable to tax under the five heads, namely,
Salaries, Income from house property, Profits and gains of business or
profession, Capital Gains and Income from Other Sources, considering the
charging and deeming provisions thereunder.
3 Compute the income under each head, after considering the permissible
and impermissible deductions, which would depend upon the regime
under which the individual is paying tax i.e., whether under the default tax
regime under section 115BAC or the optional tax regime as per the normal
provisions of the Act.
4 Apply the clubbing provisions under the Act.
5 Apply the set-off and carry forward and set-off provisions.
6 Compute the gross total income.
Chapter VI-A and deduction under section 10AA to arrive at the total
income. Here again, if an individual is paying tax under the default tax
regime under section 115BAC, only deduction under section 80CCD(2),
80CCH(2) and 80JJAA would be allowable.
8 Compute the total income [Total Income = GTI – Deductions under
Chapter VIA – Deduction under section 10AA, if eligible]
9 Apply the tax rates on total income. The tax rates will depend on
whether he pays tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or
under the normal provisions of the Act. Special rates under section 112
and 112A would apply to long-term capital gains; under section 111A to
short-term capital gains on transfer of listed equity shares and units of
equity oriented fund; and under section 115BB/115BBJ to casual income.
These special rates will be applicable under both tax regimes.
10 - Add surcharge on income-tax, if applicable, on the income-tax so
computed. Surcharge@10% is leviable on income-tax on total income
above ` 50 lakh. Higher rates of surcharge would apply with increase
in total income above specified threshold limits. The highest rate of
surcharge is 25% of income-tax computed under section 115BAC,
where total income exceeds ` 2 crores; whereas it is 37% of income-
tax computed under the normal provisions of the Act, where total
income exceeds ` 5 crores.
- Allow rebate u/s 87A, if total income does not exceed the prescribed
limits under the default tax regime under section 115BAC and under
the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
11 Add Health and education cess@4% to the income-tax plus surcharge, if
applicable/minus rebate, if applicable. The resultant figure would be the
tax liability of the individual.
on income-tax (or) – Rebate u/s 87A, if applicable + HEC@4%
13 Compute Alternate Minimum Tax on Adjusted total income. Alternate
Minimum Tax provisions would apply in case of an individual shifting out
of the default tax regime and paying tax as per the normal provisions of
the Act, if he is claiming certain deductions, like section 10AA, 35AD,
80JJAA, 80QQB and 80RRB. Tax liability would be the higher of tax
computed under the regular provisions and alternate minimum tax.
14 Deduct TDS, TCS and advance tax from the tax liability to arrive at the
tax payable by an individual.
Read the Scenario below containing the details of income of Mr. Raj and his
brother Mr. Rahul, both of whom are resident and ordinarily resident in India for
the P.Y.2024-25. Fill in the correct figures in the shaded boxes in the income
computation sheets and tax computation sheets given and advise them whether
to pay tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or not.
SCENARIO
Mr. Raj is an MBA employed with a multinational company in Mumbai. He is living
in a rented house in Mumbai for which he pays rent of ` 70,000 p.m. He owns a
house in Kolkata in which his parents are living. He purchased the house two
years back by taking loan from Bank of India. Interest of ` 3,00,000 is due for
P.Y.2024-25, out of which he paid ` 2,75,000 during the year. He made principal
repayment of ` 1,50,000 to Bank of India during the year. In respect of this house,
he paid municipal taxes of ` 5,000 this year. He sold a vacant land in Pune for
` 25,00,000. He had purchased the land last year for ` 20,00,000. He sold listed
2022 for ` 6.50 lakhs. Securities transaction tax has been paid both at the time of
purchase and sale. During the year, he won ` 50,000 in a lottery. He has two
daughters who are studying in class IX and XI in a reputed school in Mumbai. The
tuition fee paid by him per month is ` 5,500 for each child. His elder daughter,
aged 15 years, is a talented dancer. She earned ` 30,000 from dance shows
performed by her during the year. She deposited the said amount in the bank
and earned interest of ` 3,000. Mr. Raj’s wife is a teacher in a private school
whose monthly salary is ` 40,000. She has no other income.
Mr. Raj’s brother Rahul is carrying on the business of manufacturing textiles. His
turnover is around ` 4 crores this year and last year. 90% of his receipts are
through permissible electronic modes and the remaining 10% is through cash. All
payments are made through permissible electronic modes. He has installed new
plant and machinery for ` 5 lakhs in May, 2024. His net profit as per the statement
of profit and loss for the year 2024-25 is ` 40,50,000. Normal depreciation
computed as per the Income-tax Rules, 1962 has been debited to the statement
of profit and loss. However, additional depreciation, if any, available to him, is yet
to be given effect to. This year, he incurred in-house scientific research
expenditure of ` 2 lakhs related to his business. He also contributed ` 50,000 to
IIT, Delhi for scientific research. The scientific research expenditure and
contribution to scientific research have not been debited to the statement of
profit and loss. He had employed 20 new employees from 1st June, 2024 at a
salary of ` 20,000 p.m. Their salary has been debited to the statement of profit
and loss. Rahul has let out his apartment in Bangalore from which he gets a rent
of ` 30,000 p.m. He pays municipal taxes of ` 4,000 in respect of this apartment.
He pays interest of ` 3,00,000 this year in respect of housing loan taken from Axis
Bank for purchase of this house. The principal repayment made this year is
` 1,60,000. He has been complying with all the statutory requirements under the
Income-tax Act, 1961, timely.
computation sheets given below, find out the figures, if any, to be filled up in the
shaded boxes in the income computation sheet given below –
- in column (3) (both the inner and outer columns of column 3) under
the default tax regime as per section 115BAC and
- in column (4) (both the inner and outer columns of column 4) under
the optional tax regime as per the normal provisions of the Act.
Remember, it is possible that you may not have to fill up anything at all in some
of the shaded boxes. Also, remember that you have to consider facts given in the
description above as well as the facts in column (1) and (2) of the income
computation sheets below in making your computations. Some of the facts given
in the description above are also repeated in column (2) below.
After determining the total income for A.Y.2025-26, fill up the tax computation
sheets to find out the tax liability of Mr. Raj and Mr. Rahul under both tax
regimes. Based on your computation, advise Raj and Rahul whether they should
pay tax under the default tax regime or not in order to optimise their tax liability.
Ignore interest, if any, u/s 234B and 234C.
rof
jaR
.rM
fo
emocni
latot
fo
noitatupmoC
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tnuomA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
`
ni
sralucitraP
tcA
lautcA[
`
`
`
`
]tnuoma
seiralaS
000,00,42
000,00,42
000,00,42
.m.p
000,00,2
`
=
yralaS
cisaB
000,06,9
000,06,9
000,06,9
cisab
fo
%04
ecnawollA
ssenraeD
yralas
tnemeriter
rof
yap
fo
trap
smrof
AD[
]stifeneb
000,02,7
cisab
fo
%03
ecnawolla
tneR
esuoH yralas
000,27
ecnawollA
noitacudE
nerdlihC
dlihc
hcae
rof
.m.p
000,3
`
000,84
.m.p
000,4
`
ecnawolla
tropsnarT
000,42
000,42
000,42
.m.p
000,2
`
ecnawolla
tnemniatretnE
reyolpme
yb
diap
xat
lanoisseforP
.008,4
`
fo
xat
lanoisseforp
fo
%05(
004,2
004,2
004,2
)jaR
.rM
eht
yb
diap
si
%05
ecnalaB
yralaS
ssorG
)3(
)2(
)1(
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tnuomA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
`
ni
sralucitraP
tcA
lautcA[
`
`
`
`
]tnuoma
s/u
snoitcudeD
:sseL
noitcuded
dradnatS
ecnawolla
tnemniatretnE
diap
xat
lanoisseforP
yralaS
teN
ytreporp
esuoh
morf
emocnI
)atakloK
ni(
eulaV
launnA
ssorG
000,5
jaR
.rM
yb
diap
sexat
lapicinuM
:sseL
eulaV
launnA
teN
s/u
snoitcudeD
:sseL
VAN
fo
%03
rof
naol
gnisuoh
no
eud
tseretnI
talf
fo
esahcrup
daeh
siht
rednu
ssoL/emocnI
)3(
)2(
)1(
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tnuomA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
`
ni
sralucitraP
tcA
lautcA[
`
`
`
`
]tnuoma
sniaG
latipaC
000,00,5
000,00,5
000,00,5
–
dnal
fo
elas
no
sniaG
latipaC
revehcihw
hguorhtekirtS(
GCTL/GCTS )tcerrocni
si
)000,05,2(
–
serahs
fo
elas
no
ssol
latipaC
revehcihw
hguorhtekirtS(
LCTL/LCTS )tcerrocni
si
oN/seY
serahs
fo
elas
no
ssol
latipac
eht
naC
sniag
latipac
eht
tsniaga
ffo-tes
eb
?dnal
fo
elas
no
eht
ni
erugif
ten
eht
etirw
,seY
fI
.4
dna
nmuloc
fo
nmuloc
renni
eht
ni
tnuoma
ssorg
etirw
,esiwrehtO
dna
nmuloc
fo
nmuloc
renni
daeh
siht
rednu
emocnI
secruos
rehtO
morf
emocnI
000,11
000,11
000,11
tnuocca
knab
sgnivas
no
tseretnI
)3(
)2(
)1(
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tnuomA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
`
ni
sralucitraP
tcA
lautcA[
`
`
`
`
]tnuoma
000,52
000,52
000,52
stisoped
dexiF
no
tseretnI
000,05
000,05
000,05
seirettol
morf
emocnI
rehtehw
–
dlihc
ronim
fo
emocnI
,sey
fI
?emocni
sih
ni
elbidulcni
?hcum
woh
dna
emocni
hcihw
000,03
–
swohs
ecnad
morf
emocnI
ekirtS(
elbidulcni
toN/elbidulcnI
)tcerrocni
si
revehcihw
hguorht
–
stisoped
knab
morf
emocnI
ekirtS(
elbidulcni
toN/elbidulcnI
000,3
)tcerrocni
si
revehcihw
hguorht
daeh
siht
rednu
emocnI
emocnI
latoT
ssorG
retpahC
rednu
snoitcudeD
:sseL A-IV
C08
noitces
rednU
)3(
)2(
)1(
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tnuomA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
`
ni
sralucitraP
tcA
lautcA[
`
`
`
`
]tnuoma
ATT08
noitces
rednU
A-IV
retpahC
rednu
snoitcuded
latoT
emocnI
latoT
drawrof
deirrac
eb
ot
,yna
fi
,ssoL
eht
noitneM(
72-6202.Y.A
ot
eht
dna
ereh
ssol
fo
erutan
fo
snmuloc
retuo
eht
ni
tnuoma
)4
dna
nmuloc
rof
jaR
.rM
fo
ytilibail
xat
fo
noitatupmoC
lamron
eht
rep
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
`
sralucitraP
`
sralucitraP
emocni
latot
no
xaT
emocni
latot
no
xaT
fi
,A111/A211/211
s/u[
sniag
latipac
no
xaT
fi
,A111/A211/211
s/u[
sniag
latipac
no
xaT
]elbacilppa
]elbacilppa
000,05
`
fo
emocni
yrettol
no
xaT
000,05
`
fo
emocni
yrettol
no
xaT
emocni
latot
ecnalab
no
xaT
emocni
latot
ecnalab
no
xaT
liN
000,05,2
`
otpU
liN
000,00,3
`
otpU
005,21
%5@000,00,5
`
≤
000,05,2
`
>
000,02
%5@000,00,7
`
≤
000,00,3
`
>
000,00,1
%02@000,00,01
`
≤
000,00,5
`
>
000,03
%01@000,00,01
`
≤
000,00,7
`
>
]%03@.........................[000,00,01
`
>
000,03
%51@000,00,21
`
≤
000,00,01
`
>
)ssec
erofeb(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
000,06
%02@000,00,51
`
≤
000,00,21
`
>
%4@ssec
noitacude
dna
htlaeH
:ddA
]%03@..…………………[
000,00,51
`
>
ytilibail
xat
latoT
)ssec
erofeb(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
)ffo
dednuoR(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
%4@ssec
noitacude
dna
htlaeH
:ddA
ytilibail
xat
latoT
)ffo
dednuoR(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
esnopser
ruoy
etirW
?xat-emocni
yap
jaR
dluohs
emiger
xat
hcihw
rednU
62-5202.Y.A
rof
luhaR
.rM
fo
emocni
latot
fo
noitatupmoC
)4(
)3(
)2(
)1(
rep
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tcA
eht
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
tnuomA
sralucitraP
`
`
`
`
`
ni
ni(
ytreporp
esuoh
morf
emocnI
)erolagnaB
000,06,3
000,06,3
000,06,3
deviecer
tneR[
eulaV
launnA
ssorG
fo
ecnesba
eht
ni
VAG
sa
nekat
si
]noitamrofni
rehto
yb
diap
sexat
lapicinuM
:sseL
000,4
000,4
000,4
luhaR
.rM
000,65,3
000,65,3
eulaV
launnA
teN
s/u
snoitcudeD
:sseL
008,60,1
008,60,1
VAN
fo
%03
rof
naol
gnisuoh
no
eud
tseretnI
000,00,3
tnemtrapa
fo
esahcrup
daeh
siht
rednu
ssoL
ro
;PBGP
tsniaga
ffo-tes
eb
ot
-
drawrof
deirrac
eb
ot
-
dna
ssenisub
fo
sniag
dna
stiforP
)PBGP(
noisseforp
000,05,04
000,05,04
000,05,04
tiforp
fo
tnemetats
rep
sa
tiforp
teN
ssol
dna
tub
elbawolla
snoitcudeD
:sseL
tiforp
fo
tnemetats
ot
detibed
ton
ssol
dna
noitaicerped
lanoitiddA
hcraeser
cifitneics
esuoh-nI
000,00,2
000,00,2
erutidnepxe
cifitneics
rof
TII
ot
noitubirtnoC
000,05
000,05
hcraeser
daeh
siht
rednu
emocnI
latoT
ssorG
retpahC
rednu
snoitcudeD
:sseL
A-IV
C08
noitces
rednU
AAJJ08
noitceS
rednU
emocnI
latoT
drawrof
deirrac
eb
ot
,yna
fi
,ssoL
72-6202.Y.A
ot
62-5202.Y.A
rof
luhaR
.rM
fo
ytilibail
xat
fo
noitatupmoC
fo
snoisivorp
lamron
eht
rep
sa
emiger
xat
lanoitpo
rednU
CAB511
noitces
rep
sa
emiger
xat
tluafed
rednU
tcA
eht
`
sralucitraP
`
sralucitraP
emocni
latot
no
xaT
)1(
emocni
latot
no
xaT
liN
000,05,2
`
otpU
liN
000,00,3
`
otpU
005,21
%5@000,00,5
`
≤
000,05,2
`
>
000,02
%5@000,00,7
`
≤ 000,00,3
`
>
000,00,1
%02@000,00,01
`
≤
000,00,5
`
>
000,03
%01@000,00,01
`
≤ 000,00,7
`
>
]%03@......................[000,00,01
`
>
000,03
%51@000,00,21
`
≤
000,00,01
`
>
erofeb(
ytilibail
xaT
000,06
%02@000,00,51
`
≤
000,00,21
`
>
%4@ssec
noitacude
dna
htlaeH
:ddA
]%03@.………………[
000,00,51
`
>
ytilibail
xaT
)ssec
erofeb(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
)ffo
dednuoR(
ytilibail
xaT
%4@ssec
noitacude
dna
htlaeH
:ddA
dna
emocni
latot
detsujdA
etupmoC
)2(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
xaT
muminiM
etanretlA
)ffo
dednuoR(
ytilibail
xat
latoT
fo
snoisivorp
raluger
eht
rep
sa
emocni
latoT
tcA
eht
AAJJ08
s/u
noitcudeD
:ddA
emocnI
latoT
detsujdA
fo
%5.81
–
)TMA(
xaT
muminiM
etanretlA
emocni
latot
detsujdA
%4@ssec
noitacude
dna
htlaeH
:ddA
ytilibail
TMA
)ffo
dednuoR(
ytilibail
TMA
)2(
dna
)1(
fo
rehgiH[
luhaR
fo
ytilibail
xaT
)3(
]evoba
esnopser
ruoy
etirW
?xat-emocni
yap
luhaR
dluohs
emiger
xat
hcihw
rednU
.2
eludoM
fo
dne
eht
ta
oiranecS
eht
ot
srewsna
eht
dniF
© The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India
CHAPTER
INCOME TAX
LIABILITY -
COMPUTATION AND
OPTIMISATION
LEARNING OUTCOMES
After studying this chapter, you would be able to–
♦ compute the tax liability of an individual under the default tax regime
under section 115BAC;
♦ compute the tax liability of an individual as per the regular provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961;
♦ examine the applicability of the provisions of Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT), if
applicable and compute the tax liability applying such provisions and
determine the tax credit, if any, to be carried forward;
♦ compare the tax liability computed under the default tax regime under section
115BAC with the tax liability under the regular provisions of the Act (including
provisions relating to AMT, if applicable) and determine which is more
beneficial to the individual.
CHAPTER OVERVIEW
COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME
Determination of residential status
Classification of Income under
5 heads
Income from Profits and gains
Salaries Capital Income from
house property of business or
gains other sources
profession
Compute income under each head applying the
charging & deeming provisions and providing for
permissible deductions/exemptions thereunder
Apply the clubbing provisions
Set-off/carry forward and
set-off of losses as per the provisions of the Act
Compute Gross Total Income (GTI)
Less: Deductions from Gross Total Income
Total Income (TI)
9.3
AND OPTIMISATION
1. MEANING OF TOTAL INCOME
The total income of an individual is arrived at after making deductions under
Chapter VI-A from the Gross Total Income. As we have learnt earlier, Gross Total
Income is the aggregate of the income computed under the 5 heads of income,
after giving effect to the provisions for clubbing of income and set-off and carry
forward & set-off of losses.
2. INCOME TO BE CONSIDERED WHILE
COMPUTING TOTAL INCOME OF
INDIVIDUALS
Capacity in which Treatment of income earned in each capacity
income is earned by
an individual
(1) In his personal Income from salaries, Income from house property,
capacity (under the 5 Profits and gains of business or profession, Capital
heads of income) gains and Income from other sources.
(2) As a partner of a (i) Salary, bonus etc. received by a partner is
firm/LLP taxable as his business income.
(ii) Interest on capital and/or loans to the
firm/LLP is taxable as business income of the
partner.
The income mentioned in (i) and (ii) above are
taxable to the extent they are allowed as
deduction to the firm.
(iii) Share of profit in the firm is exempt in the
hands of the partner [Section 10(2A)]. The
profit credited to the partners’ accounts in the
firm would be exempt from tax in the hands
of such partners, even if the income
chargeable to tax becomes Nil in the hands of
the firm on account of any exemption or
deduction available under the provisions of
the Act [Circular No. 8/2014 dated
31.03.2014].
(3) As a member of HUF (i) Share of income of HUF is exempt in the
hands of the member [Section 10(2)].
(ii) Income from an impartible estate of HUF is
taxable in the hands of the holder of the
estate who is the eldest member of the HUF.
(iii) Income from self-acquired property
converted into joint family property, without
adequate consideration.
(4) Income of other (i) Transferee’s income, where there is a
persons included in transfer of income without transfer of assets
the income of the (ii) Income arising to transferee from a
individual revocable transfer of an asset.
In cases (i) and (ii), income is includible in the
hands of the transferor.
(iii) Income of spouse as mentioned in section
64(1)(ii)/(iv)
(iv) Income from assets transferred otherwise
than for adequate consideration to any
person for the benefit of spouse [Section
64(1)(vii)].
(v) Income from assets transferred otherwise
than for adequate consideration to son’s
wife or to any person for the benefit of son’s
wife [Section 64(1)(vi)/(viii)].
(vi) Income of minor child as mentioned in
section 64(1A).
3. COMPUTATION OF TOTAL INCOME AND TAX
PAYABLE BY AN INDIVIDUAL
Income-tax is levied on an assessee’s total income. Such total income has to be
computed as per the provisions contained in the Income-tax Act, 1961. Steps 1 to
8 given hereunder have to be followed for computing total income of an
individual assessee. Thereafter, steps 9 to 15 have to be followed for computing
the tax payable.
9.5
AND OPTIMISATION
Step 1 – Determination of residential status
♦ The residential status of an individual has to be determined to ascertain
which income is to be included in computing the total income.
♦ In the case of an individual, the duration for which he is present in
India in the relevant previous year or relevant previous year and the
earlier previous years, as the case may be, determine his residential
status.
♦ An individual can be either a –
- Resident and ordinarily resident
- Resident but not ordinarily resident
- Non-resident
♦ An individual who is a citizen of India, having total income, other than the
income from foreign sources, exceeding ` 15 lakh during the previous year,
would be deemed resident in India in that previous year, if he is not liable to
tax in any other country or territory by reason of his domicile or residence or
any other criteria of similar nature. Such deemed resident would, by default,
be a resident but not ordinarily resident in India in that previous year.
♦ The residential status of an individual determines the scope of his taxable
income.
♦ For example, income which accrues outside India and is received outside
India is taxable in the hands of a resident and ordinarily resident but is not
taxable in the case of a non-resident. In the case of a resident but not
ordinarily resident, such income would be taxable only if it is derived from a
business controlled in India or profession set up in India.
Step 2 – Classification of income under different heads
♦ An individual may earn income from different sources. Under the Income-
tax Act, 1961, for computation of total income, all income of an individual
assessee can be classified into five different heads of income.
♦ There are five heads of income, namely, -
- Salaries,
- Income from house property,
- Profits and gains of business or profession
- Capital Gains
- Income from other sources
♦ The income of an assessee should be identified and grouped under the
respective head of income.
♦ Each head of income has a charging section (for example, section 15 for
salaries, section 22 for income from house property).
♦ Deeming provisions are also contained under certain heads, by which
specific items are sought to be taxed under those heads.
For example, unrealized rent and arrears of rent from house property would
be deemed to be income from house property in the hands of the recipient
individual even if he is not the owner of the house property at the time of
receipt of such amount.
♦ The charging section and the deeming provisions would help you to
determine the scope of income chargeable under a particular head.
Step 3 – Computation of income under each head
♦ Income is to be computed in accordance with the provisions governing a
particular head of income.
♦ Assess the income under each head by -
- applying the charging and deeming provisions,
- excluding items of income relating to that head in respect of which
specific exemptions are provided in section 10.
There are certain incomes which are wholly exempt from income-tax.
These incomes have to be excluded and will not form part of Gross
Total Income. For e.g. agricultural income which is exempt under both
the tax regimes.
Also, some incomes are partially exempt from income-tax. These
incomes are excluded while computing income under the relevant
head only to the extent of the limits specified in the Act. For e.g. House
Rent Allowance, Children Education Allowance are exempt upto
prescribed limits under the optional tax regime as per normal provisions
9.7
AND OPTIMISATION
of the Act. However, there is no exemption for these allowances under
the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
- allowing the permissible deductions under that head, and
For example, while calculating income from house property of a
rented house property, municipal taxes paid by the owner and interest
on loan are allowed as deduction. Standard deduction of upto
` 50,000 (under optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default
regime) is allowed under salaries. Similarly, deductions and
allowances are prescribed under other heads of income.
- disallowing the non-permissible deductions.
For example, while computing income under the head “Profits and
gains from business or profession” expenditure of personal nature and
expenditure which is in the nature of offence are not allowable as
deduction. Hence, such expenditure, if any, debited to profits and loss
account, has to be added back while computing income under this
head.
Likewise, while computing net consideration for capital gains,
brokerage is a permissible deduction from gross sale consideration
but securities transaction tax paid is not permissible.
♦ In this step, it is necessary to consider whether the individual is paying tax
under the default tax regime or exercising the option to shift out of the
default tax regime and pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the
normal provisions of the Act. Certain deductions which are allowable under
the normal provisions of the Act are not permissible under the default tax
regime, for example, additional depreciation, investment linked tax
deduction under section 35AD, contribution to scientific research
association, national laboratory, IIT etc. However, expenditure on in-house
scientific research related to the business of the assessee is allowable as
deduction under both the tax regimes.
Step 4 – Clubbing of income of spouse, minor child etc.
♦ An individual in a higher tax bracket may have a tendency to divert his
income to another person who is not subject to tax or who is in a lower tax
bracket.
For example, an individual may make a fixed deposit in the name of his
minor son, so that income from such deposit would accrue to his son, who
does not have any other income.
♦ In order to prevent evasion of income-tax by such means, clubbing
provisions have been incorporated in the Income-tax Act, 1961, under which
income arising to certain persons (like spouse, son’s wife etc.) have to be
included in the income of the person who has diverted his income to such
persons for the purpose of computing tax liability.
Further, income of a minor child, not being a minor child suffering from any
disability of the nature specified in section 80U (other than income derived
from exercise of special skills/talent or manual work done by him) is
includible in the hands of the parent whose total income is higher before
including minor’s income. Such income will be included in the hands of the
parent and if that parent has exercised the option to shift out of the default
tax regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, exemption of
up to ` 1,500 under section 10(32) would be provided from that income.
Step 5 – Set-off or carry forward and set-off of losses
An individual may have different sources of income under the same head of
income. He may have profit from one source and loss from the other. Similarly, he
can have loss under one head of income and profits under another head of
income. There are provisions in the Act for allowing inter-source and inter-head
adjustment.
♦ Inter-source set-off of losses
- A person may have income from one source and loss from another
source under the same head of income. For instance, a person may
have profit from wholesale trade of merchandise and loss from the
business of plying vehicles.
The loss of one business can be set-off against the profits of another
business to arrive at the net income under the head “Profits and gains
of business or profession”. However, loss from speculation business
can be set-off only against profits from speculation business and not
any other business.
- Set-off of loss from one source against income from another source
within the same head of income is permissible, subject to certain
9.9
AND OPTIMISATION
exceptions, like long-term capital loss cannot be set-off against short-
term capital gains though short-term capital loss can be set-off
against long-term capital gains.
♦ Inter-head set-off of losses
- Likewise, set-off of loss from one head against income from another
head is also permissible, subject to certain exceptions, like business
loss cannot be set-off against salary income; loss under the head
“Capital Gains” cannot be set-off against any other head of income.
- Loss from house property cannot be set-off against any other head of
income, if the individual pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
If the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pays tax under normal provisions of the Act, loss from
house property can be set-off against income under any other head
only to the extent of ` 2 lakhs. The remaining loss from house
property has to be carried forward to the subsequent year to be set-
off against income from house property in that year.
♦ Carry forward and set-off of losses
- Unabsorbed losses of the current year can be carried forward to the
next year for set-off only against the respective head of income.
- Here again, if there are any restrictions relating to inter-source set-off,
the same will apply, like long-term capital loss which is carried forward
can be set-off only against long-term capital gains and not short-term
capital gains of a later year.
- The maximum number of years up to which any particular loss can be
carried forward is also provided under the Act.
For example, business loss can be carried forward for a maximum of 8
assessment years to be set-off against business income. However, loss
from specified business referred to in section 35AD can be carried
forward indefinitely for set-off against profits of any specified
business.
It must be noted that loss from an exempt source cannot be set-off against
profits from a taxable source of income.
Example: Share of loss from a partnership firm cannot be set-off against sole
proprietary business income of the partner, since share of income of the firm is
exempt under section 10(2A).
Step 6 – Computation of Gross Total Income
♦ The income computed under each head, after giving effect to the clubbing
provisions and provisions for set-off and carry forward and set-off of losses,
have to be aggregated to arrive at the gross total income.
♦ The process of computing GTI is depicted hereunder -
Add income → Apply → Apply the provisions for
computed under clubbing set-off and carry forward
each head provisions of losses
Step 7 – Deductions from Gross Total Income
Certain deductions are allowable from gross total income to arrive at the total
income. These deductions are contained in Chapter VI-A. These deductions are
allowable if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act, subject to satisfaction of
the conditions prescribed in the relevant sections.
♦ Deduction in respect of certain payments, for example,
Section Nature of Payment/Deposit
80C Payment of life insurance premium, tuition fees of children,
deposit in public provident fund, repayment of housing loan
etc.
80D Medical insurance premium paid by an individual/HUF for the
specified persons/ contribution to CGHS etc.
80E Payment of interest on educational loan taken for self or
relative
♦ Deduction in respect of certain incomes, for example,
Section Nature of Income
80QQB Royalty income of authors of certain books other than text books
80RRB Royalty on patents
9.11
AND OPTIMISATION
♦ Deduction in respect of other incomes
Section Nature of Income
80TTA Interest on savings account with a bank, co-operative society
and post office.
80TTB Interest on deposit with a bank, co-operative society and post
office in case of senior citizens
♦ Other Deductions
Deduction under section 80U in case of a person with disability
In addition, deduction is also allowable under section 10AA in respect of an
assessee who derives profits and gains from an undertaking which manufactures
or produces articles or things or provides any service in any SEZ on or before
31.3.2021 if the individual exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act.
There are limits in respect of deduction under certain sections. The
payments/incomes are allowable as deduction subject to such limits. For example,
the maximum deduction under section 80RRB is ` 3 lakhs; under section 80TTA is
` 10,000 and under section 80TTB is ` 50,000.
Note - Deduction under section 80CCD(2) [Employer’s contribution to pension
scheme of Central Government], section 80CCH(2) [Central Government’s
contribution to assessee’s account in Agniveer Corpus Fund] and section 80JJAA
would be available if the eligible assessee pays tax at concessional rates of tax u/s
115BAC under the default tax regime.
Step 8 – Computation of Total income
♦ The gross total income as reduced by the above deductions under Chapter
VI-A and section 10AA is the total income.
Total income = GTI – Deductions under Chapter VI-A and section 10AA
♦ It should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10.
♦ Tax is calculated on the total income of the assessee.
Step 9 – Application of the rates of tax on the total income in case of an
individual
♦
Concessional tax rates under default tax regime under section 115BAC
of the Income-tax Act, 1961
For individuals, there is a slab rate and basic exemption limit. At present, the
basic exemption limit is ` 3,00,000 under the default tax regime. The rates of
tax and level of total income are as under –
Total income (in `) Rate of Tax
(i) Upto ` 3,00,000 NIL
(ii) From ` 3,00,001 to ` 7,00,000 5%
(iii) From ` 7,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 10%
(iv) From ` 10,00,001 to ` 12,00,000 15%
(v) From ` 12,00,001 to ` 15,00,000 20%
(vi) Above ` 15,00,000 30%
♦
Tax rates prescribed by the Annual Finance Act under the optional tax
regime (regular provisions of the Act)
The slab rates for A.Y. 2025-26 applicable to Individual under normal
provisions of the Act are as follows:
Total income (in `) Rate of
Tax
(i) Upto ` 2,50,000 (below 60 years) Nil
(ii) Upto ` 3,00,000 (60 years or above but less than 80 years
and resident in India)
(iii) Upto ` 5,00,000 (above 80 years and resident in India)
` 2,50,001/ ` 3,00,001, as the case may be, to ` 5,00,000 [in 5%
cases (i) and (ii) above, respectively]
` 5,00,001 to ` 10,00,000 20%
Above ` 10,00,000 30%
♦ The rates of tax have to be applied on the total income to compute the tax
liability.
♦ Rates of tax in respect of certain incomes are provided under the Income-
tax Act, 1961 itself. Slab rates are not applicable under both the tax regimes
9.13
AND OPTIMISATION
in respect of such incomes. For instance, the rates of tax for long term
capital gains on certain assets, long term capital gain on other assets,
certain short term capital gains, winnings from lotteries, crossword puzzles,
races and winnings from online games etc. are prescribed in sections 112A,
112, 111A, 115BB and 115BBJ, respectively.
♦ The special rates of tax have to be applied on the respective component of
total income and the general slab rates have to be applied on the balance
of total income as per the tax regime in which he pays tax.
♦ The unexhausted basic exemption limit can, however, be adjusted against
long-term capital gains taxable under section 112/112A and short-term
capital gains taxable under section 111A in case of resident individual in
both the tax regime.
Step 10 – Surcharge/ Rebate under section 87A
Surcharge: Surcharge is an additional tax payable over and above the income-
tax. Surcharge is levied as a percentage of income-tax.
In case the assessee pays tax under default tax regime under section 115BAC
The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2025-26, in case the individual assessee
pays tax under default regime under section 115BAC, are as follows:
Rate of
Particulars
surcharge on
income-tax
(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and 10%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore
(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital 15%
gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1
crore but ≤ ` 2 crore
(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and 25%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 2 crore
The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to exceeding
tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income 15%
(iv) Where total income (including dividend income and capital 15%
gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2
crore in cases not covered under (iii) above
In case the assessee exercises the option to shift out of the default regime
The rates of surcharge applicable for A.Y.2025-26, in case the individual assessee
exercises the option to shift out of the default regime, are as follows:
Rate of
Particulars surcharge on
income-tax
(i) Where the total income (including dividend income and 10%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 50 lakhs but ≤ ` 1 crore
(ii) Where total income (including dividend income and capital 15%
gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 1
crore but ≤ ` 2 crore
(iii) Where total income (excluding dividend income and 25%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 2 crore but ≤ ` 5 crore
The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to exceeding
tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income 15%
(iv) Where total income (excluding dividend income and 37%
capital gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) >
` 5 crore
The rate of surcharge on the income-tax payable on the Not
portion of dividend income and capital gains chargeable to exceeding
tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A included in total income 15%
(v) Where total income (including dividend income and capital 15%
gains chargeable to tax u/s 111A, 112 and 112A) > ` 2
crore in cases not covered under (iii) and (iv) above
Marginal relief would also be available under both the tax regimes to ensure that
the increase in amount of tax payable (including surcharge) due to increase in
total income of an assessee beyond the prescribed limit should not exceed the
amount of increase in total income.
9.15
AND OPTIMISATION
Rebate under section 87A: Section 87A provides a rebate from the tax payable
by an assessee, being an individual resident in India.
Rebate to resident individual paying tax under default regime u/s 115BAC
(i) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under
section 115BAC and the total income of such individual does not exceed
` 7,00,000, the rebate shall be equal to the amount of income-tax payable on
his total income for any assessment year or an amount of ` 25,000, whichever
is less.
(ii) If the total income of the resident individual is chargeable to tax under
section 115BAC and the total income of such individual exceeds ` 7,00,000
and income-tax payable on such total income exceeds the amount by which
the total income is in excess of ` 7,00,000, the rebate would be as follows.
Step 1 – Total income (-) ` 7 lakhs (A)
Step 2 - Compute income-tax payable on total income (B)
Step 3 - If B>A, rebate under section 87A would be a B – A.
Rebate to resident individual paying tax under optional tax regime (normal
provisions of the Act
If total income of such individual does not exceed ` 5,00,000, the rebate shall be
equal to the amount of income-tax payable on the total income for any
assessment year or an amount of ` 12,500, whichever is less.
However, rebate under section 87A is not available in respect of tax payable on
long-term capital gains taxable under section 112A.
Step 11 – Health and Education cess (HEC) on Income-tax
The amount of income-tax as increased by the union surcharge, if applicable,
should be further increased by an additional surcharge called the “Health and
Education cess on income-tax”, calculated at the rate of 4% of such income-tax
and surcharge, if applicable. Health and education cess is leviable in the case of
all assessees i.e. individuals, HUF, AOP/BOI, firms, local authorities, co-operative
societies and companies.
It is leviable to fulfill the commitment of the Government to provide and finance
quality health services and universalised quality basic education and secondary
and higher education
Total Tax = Tax on total (+) Surcharge, at (+) HEC@
Liability of income at applicable rates, if 4%
an individual applicable rates total income >
` 50 lakhs,
or
(-) Rebate u/s 87A
Step 12 – Alternate Minimum Tax (AMT)
The Income-tax Act, 1961 contains profit-linked and investment-linked
deductions in order to encourage investment in various industries and
infrastructure facilities. Taxpayers who exercise the option to shift out of the
default tax regime under section 115BAC and are eligible to claim such
deductions end up paying no income-tax or marginal income-tax though they are
capable of paying higher taxes. It has to be kept in mind that our Government
also needs regular/consistent inflow of tax, which is one of its major source of
revenue, to fund various expenses for the welfare of the country. Hence, in order
to ensure payment of reasonable tax by such zero-tax paying/marginal-tax paying
entities, the concept of alternate minimum tax has been introduced in the
Income-tax Act, 1961.
Chapter XII-BA contains special provisions for levy of alternate minimum tax in
case of persons other than a company1. Any person other than a company, who
has claimed deduction under any section (other than section 80P) included in
Chapter VI-A under the heading “C – Deductions in respect of certain incomes” or
under section 10AA or investment-linked deduction under section 35AD would be
subject to AMT [Section 115JEE(1)].
The provisions of AMT would, however, not be applicable to an individual, HUF,
AOPs, BOIs, whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person, if the
adjusted total income of such person does not exceed ` 20 lakh [Section
115JEE(2)].
Individual/ HUF/ AoP/ BoI and artificial juridical person, paying tax under default
tax regime under section 115BAC, are also not liable to alternate minimum tax
under section 115JC.
1 Since in respect of companies, minimum alternate tax (MAT) provisions are applicable, which will be
dealt with at the Final level.
9.17
AND OPTIMISATION
Note - At intermediate level, since profit-linked deductions provided under section
80-IA to 80-IE, section 80JJA, 80LA, 80M, 80P and 80PA have been excluded from
the scope of syllabus by way of Study Guidelines and computation of total income
and tax liability is restricted to individual assessees only, the discussion in relation
to AMT in this chapter is limited with respect to deduction under section 10AA,
section 35AD and deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB only.
Accordingly, where the regular income-tax payable by a person for a previous
year computed as per the normal provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 is less
than the AMT payable for such previous year, the adjusted total income shall be
deemed to be the total income of the person. Such person shall be liable to pay
income-tax on the adjusted total income @18.5% plus surcharge, if applicable,
and HEC @4% [Section 115JC].
“Adjusted total income” would mean the total income before giving effect to
Chapter XII-BA as increased by
(i) the deductions claimed, if any, under section 10AA;
(ii) the deduction claimed under section 35AD, as reduced by the depreciation
allowable under section 32, as if no deduction under section 35AD was
allowed in respect of the asset for which such deduction is claimed; and
(iii) deduction under any section included in Chapter VI-A under the heading C-
Deductions in respect of certain incomes [For Intermediate level, the
relevant sections are 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB].
Tax credit for AMT [Section 115JD]
Tax credit is the excess of AMT paid over the regular income-tax payable under
the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the year. Such tax credit shall be
carried forward and set-off against income-tax payable in the later year to the
extent of excess of regular income-tax payable under normal the provisions of the
Act over the AMT payable in that year. The balance tax credit, if any, shall be
carried forward to the next year for set-off in that year in a similar manner.
AMT credit can be carried forward for set-off upto a maximum period of 15
assessment years succeeding the assessment year in which the credit becomes
allowable.
Tax Credit allowable even if Adjusted Total Income does not exceed ` 20 lakh in
the year of set-off [Section 115JEE(3)]
In case where the assessee has not claimed any deduction under section 10AA or
section 35AD or deduction under section 80JJAA, 80QQB & 80RRB in any previous
year and the adjusted total income of that year does not exceed ` 20 lakh, it
would still be entitled to set-off his brought forward AMT credit in that year.
Tax credit not allowable to the assessee paying tax under the default tax
regime
A person who is paying tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC
would not be eligible to claim AMT credit.
Step 13 – Examine whether to pay tax under default regime under section
115BAC or pay tax under the optional tax regime as per the regular provisions
of the Act
In case of an assessee not having income from business or profession:
In case of individuals not having income from business or profession, the total
income and tax liability may be computed every year, both in accordance with
default tax regime under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act
(including provisions relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which
is more beneficial and accordingly, decide whether or not to shift out of the
default regime under section 115BAC.
In effect, such individual can choose whether or not to exercise the option of
shifting out in each previous year. He may choose to pay tax under default regime
under section 115BAC in one year and exercise the option to shift out of default
tax regime in another year.
In case of an assessee having income from business or profession:
In case of individuals having income from business or profession, the total income
and tax liability may be computed, both in accordance with default tax regime
under section 115BAC and regular provisions of the Act (including provisions
relating to AMT, if applicable), in order to determine which is more beneficial.
Such individual has an option to shift out/opt out of the default tax regime under
this section and the option has to be exercised on or before the due date
specified under section 139(1) for furnishing the return of income for such
previous year and once such option is exercised, it would apply to subsequent
assessment years.
9.19
AND OPTIMISATION
Such person who has exercised the above option of shifting out of the default
regime for any previous year shall be able to withdraw such option only once and
pay tax under the default regime under section 115BAC for a previous year other
than the year in which it was exercised.
Thereafter, such person shall never be eligible to exercise option under this
section, except where such person ceases to have any business income
Step 14 – Credit for advance tax, TDS and TCS
♦ Tax is deductible at source at the time of payment of salary, rent, interest,
fees for professional services, royalty etc.
♦ The payer has to deduct tax at source at the rates specified in the respective
sections.
♦ Such tax deducted at source has to be reduced by the payee to determine
his net tax liability.
♦ Tax is collectible by the seller in case of certain goods at the rate specified
in the respective section. Credit of such tax collection at source is allowable
to determine the tax liability.
♦ The Income-tax Act, 1961 also requires payment of advance tax in
instalments during the previous year itself on the basis of estimated income,
if the tax payable, after reducing TDS/TCS, is ` 10,000 or more.
♦ An individual is required to pay advance tax in four instalments, on or
before 15th June, 15th September, 15th December and 15th March of the
financial year.
♦ Assessees declaring profits under presumptive taxation provisions under
section 44AD or under section 44ADA can, however, pay the entire advance
tax on or before 15th March of the financial year.
♦ From the total tax due, deduct the TDS, TCS and advance tax paid for the
relevant assessment year to arrive at the tax payable.
Tax Payable = Total tax liability – TDS – TCS - Advance tax paid
Step 15 - Tax Payable/ Tax Refundable
After adjusting the advance tax, tax deducted and collected at source, the
assessee would arrive at the amount of net tax payable or refundable. Such
amount should be rounded off to the nearest multiple of ` 10. The assessee has
to pay the amount of tax payable (called self-assessment tax) before or at the
time of filing of the return. Similarly, if any refund is due, assessee will get the same
after filing the return of income.
Note: Students are advised to read the above steps carefully and follow the given
procedure while solving problems on computation of total income and tax liability.
4. TAX PLANNING IN RESPECT OF SALARY
INCOME
The definition of salary is very wide and includes not only monetary salary but
also benefits and perquisites in kind. Under the default tax regime under section
115BAC, the only deduction available under section 16 in respect of salary income
is the standard deduction of upto ` 75,000. However, under the optional tax
regime as per normal provisions of the Act, the deductions available under
section 16 in respect of salary income are the standard deduction upto ` 50,000,
deduction for entertainment allowance (only for government employees) and
deduction for professional tax. The following are some of the aspects which can
be considered for tax planning in regard to salary income -
(1) Salary Structure: An employer may plan the salary structure of employees
keeping in view the deductions and exemptions available under the Act. If
salary is paid as a consolidated amount, without any break-up, the amount
of salary after providing standard deduction of upto ` 50,000 (under
optional regime) and ` 75,000 (under default regime), would become
taxable without any further exemption and deduction. Therefore, the
employer may structure the salary by including various allowances and
perquisites in addition to basic salary, so as to enable the employee to
optimise his tax liability.
For example, the employer may include allowances as part of the salary
structure of the employees for which exemption can be claimed under Rule
2BB if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime, e.g. Children education allowance, hostel allowance, house rent
allowance. The employer will get a deduction of all the above amounts paid
while computing his profits and gains of business or profession.
Further, if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default tax
regime, the employer can give such allowances like special compensatory
allowance, border area allowance or remote area allowance or difficult area
allowance or disturbed area allowance depending upon the place of posting
of the employee. Some exemptions are available in respect of these
9.21
AND OPTIMISATION
allowances. In this connection, Rule 2BB specifies the exempt allowances.
The employer has to make a careful study and fix the salary structure in
such a manner that it will include allowances which are exempt.
(2) Employees’ welfare schemes: There are several employees’ welfare
schemes such as recognised provident fund, approved superannuation fund,
gratuity fund. Payments received from such funds by the employees are
totally exempt or exempt upto significant amounts.
For example, gratuity received by an employee covered under the Payment
of Gratuity Act, 1972 is exempt upto ` 20 lakh. The provident fund received
by the employee from recognised provident fund is exempt, subject to
limits and conditions. The employer can institute such welfare schemes for
the benefit of the employees. Such amount contributed by the employer
towards the above funds is deductible. However, a note of caution is
necessary here in view of the restrictive provisions of section 40A(9) which
disallows any contribution made to any welfare funds except where such
contributions are covered by section 36(1)(iv)/(iva)/(v) or as required by or
under any other law for the time being in force. Further, the employer can
contribute to recognized provident fund account of the employee upto 12%
of salary, and the same would not be taxable in the hands of the employees.
The amount or aggregate of amounts of any contribution made in a
recognised provident fund, in NPS referred to in section 80CCD(1) and in an
approved superannuation fund by the employer to the account of the
assessee, to the extent it exceeds ` 7,50,000, would be taxable as perquisite
in the hands of the employee. Likewise, if an employee’s contribution to RPF
exceeds ` 2,50,000 p.a. or ` 5,00,000 p.a. (on or after 1.4.2021), as the case
may be, depending on whether the employer contributes to RPF, then,
interest accured on the amount exceeding the specified threshold would be
taxable. The detailed provisions have been dealt with in Unit 1 of Chapter 3.
(3) Insurance policies: Any payment made by an employer on behalf of an
employee to maintain a life policy will be treated as perquisite in the hands
of the employee. Further, payments received from the employer in respect
of key man insurance policies constitute income in the hands of the
employees. However, any sum reimbursed by the employer in respect of any
mediclaim premium paid by the employee to keep in force an insurance on
his health or the health of any member of his family under any scheme
approved by the Central Government or IRDA for the purpose of section
80D is not a perquisite in the hands of the employee.
Further, the payment of premium by the employer on behalf of the
employee will not be treated as a perquisite in the case of accident
insurance policies. This is due to the fact that the employer has a vested
interest in the safety of the life of his employee who is engaged in such
dangerous occupations.2
In respect of accident insurance policies, the term perquisite applies to only
such sums in regard to which there was an obligation on the part of the
employer to pay and a vested right on the part of the employee. If the
employee has no vested interest in the policy, it cannot be considered as a
perquisite. In cases where an employer takes out accident insurance policy
covering all workmen and staff members and pays insurance premium and
whenever any worker/staff member meets with an accident and the amount
of claim is received from the insurance company and the same is paid away
by the employer to the said worker or his family members, the premium
paid by the employer in respect of group accident policies could not be
considered as a perquisite, under section 17 to be added in the salary
income of any employee3. The amount received from insurance company on
accident or death by employee or his dependents will not also be in the
nature of income but a capital receipt and therefore the same will not be
taxable.
(4) Dearness allowance, dearness pay: The employer should ensure that
dearness allowance and dearness pay should form part of “salary”. This is
because certain items like employer’s contribution to the recognised
provident fund, commuted pension etc. are calculated on the basis of salary.
Therefore, if dearness allowance, dearness pay etc. are included in salary,
the above benefits will also increase leading to higher terminal benefits in
the hands of the employee.
Also, for determining the exemption in respect of employer’s contribution
to provident fund, house rent allowance etc., dearness allowance forming
part of pay for retirement benefits is included within the meaning of
“Salary”.
2CIT v Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Del) and CIT v Vinay Bharat Ram (1981) 129 ITR 128 (Del)
3CIT v. Lala Shri Dhar (1972) 84 ITR 192 (Delhi)
9.23
AND OPTIMISATION
(5) Leave travel facility: If the employee exercises the option to shift out of
the default tax regime, the employer should avail leave travel facility. Under
section 10(5) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, exemption is provided in the
hands of the employee in respect of leave travel concession. Such
exemption is available for the employee, spouse, children (upto a maximum
of 2 children), dependent parents, dependent brothers and dependent
sisters.
However, if the employee pays tax under the default tax regime under
section 115BAC, exemption under section 10(5) would not be available.
(6) Rent free accommodation / House Rent Allowance (HRA): An employee
should analyse the tax incidence of a perquisite and an allowance, whenever
he is given an option, in order to choose the one which is more beneficial to
him. In the case of Rent Free Accommodation vs. HRA, it must be noted that
the perquisite of rent free accommodation is taxed as per Rule 3(1) of the
Income-tax Rules, 1962 and HRA is exempt to the extent mentioned in
section 10(13A) read with Rule 2A. However, exemption for HRA would be
available only if the employee exercises the option to shift out of the default
tax regime. The employee should therefore work out his tax liability and net
cash flow under both the options and then, decide on whether to receive
HRA or choose a rent free accommodation.
(7) Uncommuted/Commuted pension: Uncommuted pension is fully taxable.
Therefore, the employees should get their pension commuted. Commuted
pension is fully exempt from tax in the case of government employees and
partly exempt from tax in the case of non-government employees.
(8) Provident Fund: Accumulated balance due and becoming payable to an
employee participating in a Recognized Provident Fund (RPF) would be
exempt, where an employee who is a member of a recognised provident
fund and who resigns after completing five years of continuous service.
However, if he resigns before completing five years of continuous service he
should ensure that he joins an organisation which maintains a recognised
provident fund. The accumulated balance of the provident fund with the
previous employer will be exempt from tax provided the same is transferred
to the new employer who also maintains a recognised provident fund.
It may be noted the exemption would not be available in respect of income
by way of interest accrued during the previous year to the extent it relates
to the amount or the aggregate of amounts of contribution made by the
employee exceeding ` 2,50,000/` 5,00,000, as the case may be, in any
previous year in that fund, on or after 1st April, 2021 and computed in
prescribed manner.
(9) Other retirement benefits: Incidence of tax on retirement benefits like
leave encashment, commuted pension, accumulated balance of
unrecognized provident fund is lower if they are paid in the beginning of
the financial year.
The employer and the employees may mutually plan in such a way that
retirement takes place in the beginning of a financial year.
(10) Tax free perquisites: The following are the perquisites which are exempt
from tax–
(i) Use of computers and laptop by employee;
(ii) Medical facility in employer’s own hospital or a public hospital or
Government or other approved hospital;
(iii) Educational benefit in a school run by employer provided value of
benefit does not exceed ` 1,000 per month per child.
(11) Considerations for salary structuring: The perquisite valuation rules
prescribe the method for valuing the various perquisites provided by the
employer to his employees on the basis of the cost of such perquisites to
the employee. For a detailed study, students are advised to refer to the Unit
1 of Chapter 3 - ‘Salaries’. Accordingly, the entire salary structuring for
employees will have to be done after carefully weighing the pros and cons
of paying salary in monetary terms or allowing the benefit of perquisites in
kind to the employees.
It may be noted that a salaried person has an option to choose whether to pay
tax under the default tax regime under section 115BAC or shift out of the
default tax regime and pay tax under normal provisions of the Act in each
previous year.
Under section 115BAC, in respect of his total income, he cannot not avail
certain exemptions/deductions like Leave Travel Concession, HRA, exemption
under section 10(14) (other than those allowable under this section), interest
on housing loan on self-occupied property, deductions under Chapter VI-A
[other than under section 80CCD(2), 80CCH(2) and section 80JJAA] etc. The
9.25
AND OPTIMISATION
exemptions allowable under section 10(14) under the default tax regime
under section 115BAC include travelling allowance, daily allowance,
conveyance allowance and transport allowance to blind/deaf and
dumb/orthopedically handicapped employee.
Therefore, a salaried taxpayer not availing the above deductions/
exemptions or availing a lesser amount of such deductions/ exemptions can
analyse his tax liability under default tax regime under section 115BAC vis-
à-vis the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 in each year. An
employee intending to shift out of the default tax regime under section
115BAC has to intimate the same to the employer.
ILLUSTRATION 1
Mr. A, aged 32 years, is employed with XYZ (P) Ltd. on a basic salary of ` 50,000
p.m. He has received transport allowance of ` 15,000 p.m. and house rent
allowance of ` 20,000 p.m. from the company for the P.Y. 2024-25. He has paid
rent of ` 25,000 p.m. for an accommodation in Delhi. Mr. A has paid interest of
` 2,10,000 for housing loan taken for the construction of his house in Mumbai. The
construction of the house is completed in March, 2025 and his parents live in that
house.
Other Information
- Contribution to PPF - ` 1,50,000
- Contribution to pension scheme referred to in section 80CCD - ` 50,000
- Payment of medical insurance premium for father, who is of the age of 65 -
` 55,000
- Payment of medical insurance premium for self and spouse - ` 32,000
Compute the total income and tax liability of Mr. A for the A.Y. 2025-26 in the most
beneficial manner.
SOLUTION
Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2025-26
under default tax regime under section 115BAC
`
Particulars
Salaries
Basic Salary [` 50,000 x 12] 6,00,000
Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12] 1,80,000
HRA received [` 20,000 x 12] 2,40,000
Gross salary 10,20,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) (75,000)
9,45,000
Income from house property
Interest on housing loan -
Gross Total Income 9,45,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI- A
Section 80C
Contribution in PPF -
Section 80CCD
Contribution to pension scheme -
Section 80D
Mediclaim insurance premium for self and parents -
Total Income 9,45,000
Tax liability
Tax @5% on ` 4,00,000 [` 7,00,000 - ` 3,00,000] 20,000
Tax @10% on ` 2,45,000 [` 9,45,000 - ` 7,00,000] 24,500 44,500
Add: Health & Education cess @ 4% 1,780
Total Tax Liability 46,280
Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. A for A.Y. 2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
`
Particulars
Salaries
Basic Salary [` 50,000 x 12] 6,00,000
Transport allowance [` 15,000 x 12] 1,80,000
HRA received 2,40,000
Less: Least of the following exempt u/s 10(13A) 2,40,000 -
HRA Received 2,40,000
Actual rent paid – 10% of salary [` 3,00,000 – ` 60,000] 2,40,000
50% of salary 3,00,000
9.27
AND OPTIMISATION
Gross salary 7,80,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) (50,000)
7,30,000
Income from house property
[Annual Value is Nil. Deduction u/s 24(b) for interest on housing (2,00,000)
loan would be restricted to ` 2,00,000, in case of self-occupied
property, which would represent loss from house property]
Gross Total Income 5,30,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Section 80C
Contribution to PPF 1,50,000
Section 80CCD(1B)
Own contribution to pension scheme 50,000
Section 80D
Mediclaim insurance premium
For self and spouse, restricted to 25,000
For father, who is a senior citizen, restricted to 50,000
75,000
Total Income 2,55,000
Tax liability
Tax @ 5% on ` 5,000 [` 2,55,000 - ` 2,50,000] 250
Less: Rebate u/s 87A 250
Total Tax Liability -
Since tax liability as per the normal provisions of the Act is lower than the tax
liability under the default tax regime under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial
for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for
A.Y. 2025-26.
Note: In this case, Mr. A is entitled to exemption u/s 10(13A), benefit of interest
on housing loan in respect of self-occupied property and Chapter VI-A
deductions, owing to which his total income is reduced by ` 6,90,000. His total
income under the regular provisions of the Act is less than ` 5,00,000, owing to
which he becomes entitled to rebate u/s 87A. Hence, in this case, it is beneficial
for Mr. A to shift out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for
A.Y. 2025-26.
ILLUSTRATION 2
Mr. Kadam is entitled to a salary of ` 41,000 per month. He is given an option by
his employer either to take house rent allowance or a rent free accommodation
which is owned by the company. The HRA amount payable was ` 7,000 per month.
The rent for the hired accommodation was ` 6,000 per month at New Delhi. Advice
Mr. Kadam whether it would be beneficial for him to avail HRA or Rent Free
Accommodation. Give your advice on the basis of “Net Take Home Cash benefits”.
Assume Mr. Kadam exercises the option to shift out of the default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
SOLUTION
Computation of tax liability of Kadam under both the options
Particulars Option I – Option II –
HRA RFA
(`)
(`)
Basic Salary (` 41,000 x 12 Months) 4,92,000 4,92,000
Perquisite value of rent-free accommodation (10% of N.A. 49,200
` 4,92,000)
House rent Allowance (` 7,000 x 12 Months) ` 84,000
Less: Exempt u/s 10(13A) – least of the following -
- 50% of Basic Salary ` 2,46,000
- Actual HRA received ` 84,000
- Rent paid less 10% of salary ` 22,800 ` 22,800 61,200
Gross Salary 5,53,200 5,41,200
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) 50,000 50,000
Net Salary 5,03,200 4,91,200
Less: Deduction under Chapter VI-A - -
Total Income 5,03,200 4,91,200
Tax on total income 13,140 12,060
9.29
AND OPTIMISATION
Less: Rebate under section 87A - Lower of ` 12,500 or
income-tax of ` 12,060, since total income does not
exceed ` 5,00,000 Nil 12,060
13,140 Nil
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 526 Nil
Tax liability 13,666 Nil
Tax liability (Rounded off) 13,670 Nil
Cash Flow Statement
Particulars Option I – HRA Option II – RFA
Inflow: Salary 5,76,000 4,92,000
Less: Outflow: Rent paid (72,000) -
Tax on total income (13,670) Nil
Net Inflow 4,90,330 4,92,000
Since the net cash inflow under option II (RFA) is higher than in Option I (HRA), it
is beneficial for Mr. Kadam to avail Option II, i.e., Rent Free Accommodation.
TEST YOUR KNOWLEDGE
1. Compute the tax liability of Mr. Gupta (aged 61) under default tax regime,
having total income of ` 1,02,00,000 for the A.Y.2025-26. Assume that his
total income comprises of salary income, income from house property and
interest on fixed deposit.
2. Miss Charlie, an American national, got married to Mr. Radhey of India in
USA on 02.03.2024 and came to India for the first time on 16.03.2024. She left
for USA on 19.9.2024. She returned to India again on 27.03.2025. While in
India, she had purchased a show room in Mumbai on 30.04.2024, which was
leased out to a company on a rent of ` 25,000 p.m. from 01.05.2024. She had
taken loan from a bank for purchase of this show room on which bank had
charged interest of ` 97,500 upto 31.03.2025. She had received the following
cash gifts from her relatives and friends during 1.4.2024 to 31.3.2025:
- From parents of husband ` 51,000
- From married sister of husband ` 11,000
- From two very close friends of her husband (` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000)
(a) Determine her residential status and compute the total income
chargeable to tax along with the amount of tax liability on such income
for the A.Y. 2025-26 if she opts out of the default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
(b) Would her residential status undergo any change, assuming that she is
a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian sources is
` 18,00,000 and she is not liable to tax in USA?
3. Dr. Niranjana, a resident individual, aged 60 years is running a clinic in Surat.
Her Income and Expenditure Account for the year ending March 31st, 2025 is
as under:
Expenditure ` Income `
To Medicine consumed 35,38,400 By Consultation and 58,85,850
medical charges
9.31
AND OPTIMISATION
To Staff salary 13,80,000 By Income-tax refund 5,450
(principal ` 5,000,
interest ` 450)
To Clinic consumables 1,10,000 By Dividend from units 10,500
of UTI (Gross)
To Rent paid 90,000 By Winning from game
show on T.V. (net of
TDS of ` 15,000) 35,000
To Administrative 2,55,000 By Rent 27,000
expenses
To Amount paid to 1,50,000
scientific research
association
approved u/s 35
To Net profit 4,40,400
59,63,800 59,63,800
(i) Rent paid includes ` 30,000 paid by cheque towards rent for her
residential house in Surat.
(ii) Clinic equipments are:
1.4.2024 Opening W.D.V. - ` 5,00,000
7.12.2024 Acquired (cost) by cheque - ` 2,00,000
(iii) Rent received relates to residential house property situated at Surat.
Gross Annual Value ` 27,000. The municipal tax of ` 2,000, paid in
December, 2024, has been included in "administrative expenses".
(iv) She received salary of ` 7,500 p.m. from "Full Cure Hospital" which has
not been included in the "consultation and medical charges".
(v) Dr. Niranjana availed a loan of ` 5,50,000 from a bank for higher
education of her daughter. She repaid principal of ` 1,00,000, and
interest thereon ` 55,000 during the previous year 2024-25.
(vi) She paid ` 1,00,000 as tuition fee (not in the nature of development
fees/ donation) to the university for full time education of her daughter.
(vii) An amount of ` 28,000 has also been paid by cheque on 27th March,
2025 for her medical insurance premium.
From the above, compute the total income of Dr. Smt. Niranjana for the
A.Y. 2025-26 under the default tax regime and optional tax regime as per the
normal provisions of the Act.
4. Ms. Purvi, aged 55 years, is a Chartered Accountant in practice. She maintains
her accounts on cash basis. Her Income and Expenditure account for the year
ended March 31, 2025 reads as follows:
Expenditure (`) Income (`) (`)
Salary to staff 15,50,000 Fees earned:
Stipend to articled 1,37,000 Audit 27,88,000
Assistants Taxation 15,40,300
services
Incentive to articled 13,000 Consultancy 12,70,000 55,98,300
Assistants Dividend on 10,524
shares of X Ltd.,
an Indian
company (Gross)
Office rent 12,24,000 Income from UTI 7,600
(Gross)
Printing and 12,22,000 Honorarium 15,800
stationery received from
various
institutions for
valuation of
answer papers
Meeting, seminar 31,600 Rent received 85,600
and conference from residential
flat let out
Purchase of car (for 80,000
official use)
Repair, 4,000
maintenance
and petrol of car
9.33
AND OPTIMISATION
Travelling expenses 5,25,000
Municipal tax paid 3,000
in respect of house
property
Net Profit 9,28,224
57,17,824 57,17,824
Other Information:
(i) Allowable rate of depreciation on motor car is 15%.
(ii) Value of benefits received from clients during the course of profession is
` 10,500.
(iii) Incentives to articled assistants represent amount paid to two articled
assistants for passing CA Intermediate Examination at first attempt.
(iv) Repairs and maintenance of car include ` 2,000 for the period from
1-10-2024 to 30-09-2025.
(v) Salary includes ` 30,000 to a computer specialist in cash for assisting
Ms. Purvi in one professional assignment.
(vi) The travelling expenses include expenditure incurred on foreign tour of
` 32,000 which was within the RBI norms.
(vii) Medical Insurance Premium on the health of dependent brother and
major son dependent on her amounts to ` 5,000 and ` 10,000,
respectively, paid in cash.
(viii) She invested an amount of ` 10,000 in National Saving Certificate.
(ix) She has paid ` 70,000 towards advance tax during the P.Y. 2024-25.
Compute the total income and tax payable by Ms. Purvi for the A.Y. 2025-26 in a
most beneficial manner.
5. Mr. Y carries on his own business. An analysis of his trading and profit & loss
for the year ended 31-3-2025 revealed the following information:
(1) The net profit was ` 11,20,000.
(2) The following incomes were credited in the profit and loss account:
(a) Income from UTI ` 22,000 (Gross)
(b) Interest on debentures ` 17,500 (Gross)
(c) Winnings from horse races ` 15,000 (Gross)
(3) It was found that some stocks were omitted to be included in both the
opening and closing stocks, the value of which were:
Opening stock ` 8,000.
Closing stock ` 12,000.
(4) ` 1,00,000 was debited in the profit and loss account, being contribution
to a University approved and notified under section 35(1)(ii).
(5) Salary includes ` 20,000 paid to his brother which is unreasonable to
the extent of ` 2,500.
(6) Advertisement expenses include 15 gift packets of dry fruits costing
` 1,000 per packet presented to important customers.
(7) Total expenses on car was ` 78,000. The car was used both for business
and personal purposes. ¾th is for business purposes.
(8) Miscellaneous expenses included ` 30,000 paid to A & Co., a goods
transport operator in cash on 31-1-2025 for distribution of the
company’s product to the warehouses.
(9) Depreciation debited in the books was ` 55,000. Depreciation allowed
as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 was ` 50,000.
(10) Drawings of ` 10,000 debited in the books.
(11) Investment in NSC ` 15,000 debited in the books.
Compute the total income of Mr. Y for the assessment year 2025-26 under
optional tax regime as per normal provisions of the Act.
6. Balamurugan furnishes the following information for the year ended
31-03-2025:
Particulars `
Income from textile business (1,35,000)
Income from house property (15,000)
Lottery winning (Gross) 5,00,000
9.35
AND OPTIMISATION
Speculation business income 1,00,000
Income by way of salary (Computed) 2,70,000
Long term capital gain u/s 112 taxable @20% 70,000
Compute his total income, tax liability and advance tax obligations under
default tax regime under section 115BAC.
7. Mr. Rajiv aged 50 years, a resident individual and practicing Chartered
Accountant, furnishes you the receipts and payments account for the financial
year 2024-25.
Receipts and Payments Account
Receipts ` Payments `
Opening balance 12,000 Staff salary, bonus and 21,50,000
(1.4.2024) Cash on stipend to articled clerks
hand and at Bank
Fee from professional 59,38,000 Other administrative 11,48,000
services (Gross) expenses
Rent 50,000 Office rent 30,000
Motor car loan from 2,50,000 Housing loan repaid to SBI 1,88,000
Canara Bank (@ 9% (includes interest of
p.a.) ` 88,000)
Life insurance premium 24,000
(10% of sum assured)
Motor car (acquired in Jan. 4,25,000
2025 by A/c payee cheque)
Medical insurance 18,000
premium (for self and wife)
(paid by A/c Payee
cheque)
Books bought on 1.07.2024 20,000
(annual publications by
A/c payee cheque)
Computer acquired on 30,000
1.11.2024 by A/c payee
cheque (for professional
use)
Domestic drawings 2,72,000
Public provident fund 20,000
subscription
Motor car maintenance 10,000
Closing balance 19,15,000
(31.3.2025) Cash on hand
and at Bank
62,50,000 62,50,000
Following further information is given to you:
(1) He occupies 50% of the building for own residence and let out the
balance for residential use at a monthly rent of ` 5,000. The building
was constructed during the year 2005-06, when the housing loan was
taken.
(2) Motor car was put to use both for official and personal purpose. One-
fifth of the motor car use is for personal purpose. No car loan interest
was paid during the year.
(3) The written down value of assets as on 1-4-2024 are given below:
Furniture & Fittings ` 60,000
Plant & Machinery ` 80,000
(Air-conditioners, Photocopiers, etc.)
Computers ` 50,000
Note: Mr. Rajiv follows regularly the cash system of accounting.
Compute the total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y. 2025-26 assuming that he
has shifted out of the default tax regime under section 115BAC.
8. From the following details, compute the total income and tax liability of
Siddhant, aged 31 years, of Delhi both as per section 115BAC and as per the
regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 for the A.Y.2025-26. Advise
Mr. Siddhant whether he should opt for section 115BAC:
Particulars `
Salary including dearness allowance 4,35,000
Bonus 15,000
Salary of servant provided by the employer 12,000
Rent paid by Siddhant for his accommodation 49,600
9.37
AND OPTIMISATION
Bills paid by the employer for gas, electricity and water 11,000
provided free of cost at the above flat
Siddhant purchased a flat in a co-operative housing society in Delhi for
` 4,75,000 in April, 2016, which was financed by a loan from Life Insurance
Corporation of India of ` 1,60,000@15% interest, his own savings of ` 65,000
and a deposit from a nationalized bank for ` 2,50,000 to whom this flat was
given on lease for ten years. The rent payable by the bank was ` 3,500 per
month. The following particulars are relevant:
(a) Municipal taxes paid by Mr. Siddhant ` 4,300 (per annum)
(b) House Insurance ` 860
(c) He earned ` 2,700 in share speculation business and lost ` 4,200 in
cotton speculation business.
(d) In the year 2021-22, he had gifted ` 30,000 to his wife and ` 20,000 to
his son who was aged 11. The gifted amounts were advanced to
Mr. Rajesh, who was paying interest@19% per annum.
(e) Siddhant received a gift of ` 30,000 each from four friends.
(f) He contributed ` 50,000 to Public Provident Fund.
9. Ramdin, aged 33 years, working as Manager (Sales) with Frozen Foods Ltd.,
provides the following information for the year ended 31.03.2025:
− Basic Salary ` 15,000 p.m.
− DA (50% of it is meant for retirement benefits) ` 12,000 p.m.
− Commission as a percentage of turnover of the Company 0.5 %
− Turnover of the Company ` 50 lakhs
− Bonus ` 50,000
− Gratuity ` 30,000
− Own Contribution to R.P.F. ` 30,000
− Employer’s contribution to R.P.F. 20% of basic salary
− Interest credited in the R.P.F. account @ 15% p.a. ` 15,000
− Gold Ring worth ` 10,000 was given by employer on his 25th wedding
anniversary.
− Music System purchased on 01.04.2024 by the company for ` 85,000
and was given to him for personal use.
− Two old light goods vehicles owned by him were leased to a transport
company against the fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. Books of account are
not maintained.
− Received interest of ` 5,860 on bank FDRs on 24.4.2024 and interest of
` 6,786 (Net) from the debentures of Indian Companies on 5.5.2024.
− Made payment by cheques of ` 15,370 towards premium on Life
Insurance policies and ` 22,500 for Mediclaim Insurance policy for self
and spouse.
− Invested in NSC ` 30,000 and in FDR of SBI for 5 years ` 50,000.
− Donations of ` 11,000 to an institution approved u/s 80G and of
` 5,100 to Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund were given during the
year by way of cheque.
Compute his total income and tax payable thereon for the A.Y. 2025-26.
Assume that Mr. Ramdin has exercised the option to shift out of the default
tax regime under section 115BAC.
10. From the following particulars furnished by Mr. X for the year ended
31.3.2025, you are requested to compute his total income and tax payable for
the assessment year 2025-26, assuming that he opts out of the default tax
regime under section 115BAC.
(a) Mr. X retired on 31.12.2024 at the age of 58, after putting in 26 years
and 1 month of service, from a private company at Mumbai.
(b) He was paid a salary of ` 25,000 p.m. and house rent allowance of
` 6,000 p.m. He paid rent of ` 6,500 p.m. during his tenure of service.
(c) On retirement, he was paid a gratuity of ` 3,50,000. He was covered by
the payment of Gratuity Act. Mr. X had not received any other gratuity
at any point of time earlier, other than this gratuity.
(d) He had accumulated leave of 15 days per annum during the period of
his service; this was encashed by Mr. X at the time of his retirement. A
sum of ` 3,15,000 was received by him in this regard. His average salary
for last 10 months may be taken as ` 24,500. Employer allowed 30 days
leave per annum.
9.39
AND OPTIMISATION
(e) After retirement, he ventured into textile business and incurred a loss of
` 80,000 for the period upto 31.3.2025.
(f) Mr. X has deposited ` 1,00,000 in public provident fund.
11. Rosy and Mary are sisters, born and brought up at Mumbai. Rosy got married
in 1982 and settled at Canada since 1982. Mary got married and settled in
Mumbai. Both of them are below 60 years. The following are the details of
their income for the previous year ended 31.3.2025:
S. Particulars Rosy Mary
No. ` `
1. Pension received from State Government -- 60,000
2. Pension received from Canadian Government 20,000 --
3. Long-term capital gain on sale of land on 1,00,000 1,00,000
15.5.2024 at Mumbai taxable
4. Short-term capital gain on sale of shares on 20,000 2,50,000
23.4.2024 of Indian listed companies in respect
of which STT was paid
5. LIC premium paid -- 10,000
6. Premium paid to Canadian Life Insurance 40,000 --
Corporation at Canada
7. Mediclaim policy premium paid by A/c Payee -- 25,000
Cheque
8. Deposit in PPF -- 20,000
9. Rent received in respect of house property at 60,000 30,000
Mumbai
Compute the total income and tax liability of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the
A.Y. 2025-26 and tax thereon assuming both exercised the option to shift out
of the default tax regime.
12. Mr. X, an individual set up a unit in Special Economic Zone (SEZ) in the
financial year 2019-20 for production of washing machines. The unit fulfills
all the conditions of section 10AA of the Income-tax Act, 1961. During the
financial year 2023-24, he has also set up a warehousing facility in a district
of Tamil Nadu for storage of agricultural produce. It fulfills all the conditions
of section 35AD. Capital expenditure in respect of warehouse amounted to
` 75 lakhs (including cost of land ` 10 lakhs). The warehouse became
operational with effect from 1st April, 2024 and the expenditure of ` 75 lakhs
was capitalized in the books on that date.
Relevant details for the F.Y. 2024-25 are as follows:
Particulars `
Profit of unit located in SEZ 40,00,000
Export turnover received in India in convertible foreign 80,00,000
exchange on or before 30.9.2025
Domestic sales of above unit 20,00,000
Profit from operation of warehousing facility (before 1,05,00,000
considering deduction under Section 35AD)
Compute income-tax (including AMT under Section 115JC) liability of Mr. X
for A.Y. 2025-26 both as per section 115BAC and as per regular provisions of
the Income-tax Act, 1961 for A.Y. 2025-26. Advise Mr. X whether he should
pay tax under default tax regime or normal provisions of the Act.
ANSWERS
1. Computation of tax liability of Mr. Gupta for the A.Y.2025-26
under default tax regime
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 1,02,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,02,00,000 @30% ` 26,10,000
Total ` 27,50,000
Add: Surcharge @15% ` 4,12,500 ` 31,62,500
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1crore
(` 1,40,000 plus ` 25,50,000) ` 26,90,000
9.41
AND OPTIMISATION
Add: Surcharge@10% ` 2,69,000
` 29,59,000
(C) Total Income Less ` 1crore ` 2,00,000
(D) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore
plus the excess of total income over ` 1 crore (B +C) ` 31,59,000
(E) Tax liability: lower of (A) and (D) ` 31,59,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 1,26,360
Tax liability (including cess) ` 32,85,360
(F) Marginal Relief (A – D) ` 3,500
Alternative method -
(A) Income-tax (including surcharge) computed on total income of
` 1,02,00,000
` 3,00,000 – ` 7,00,000 @5% ` 20,000
` 7,00,001 – ` 10,00,000 @10% ` 30,000
` 10,00,001 – ` 12,00,000 @15% ` 30,000
` 12,00,001 – ` 15,00,000 @20% ` 60,000
` 15,00,001 – ` 1,02,00,000 @30% ` 26,10,000
Total ` 27,50,000
Add: Surcharge @ 15% ` 4,12,500 ` 31,62,500
(B) Income-tax computed on total income of ` 1 crore
[(` 1,40,000 plus ` 25,50,000) plus surcharge@10%] ` 29,59,000
(C) Excess tax payable (A)-(B) ` 2,03,500
(D) Marginal Relief (` 2,03,500 – ` 2,00,000, being the amount
of income in excess of ` 1,00,00,000) ` 3,500
(E) Tax liability (A)-(D) ` 31,59,000
Add: Health and education cess @4% ` 1,26,360
Tax liability (including cess) ` 32,85,360
2. (a) Under section 6(1), an individual is said to be resident in India in any
previous year, if he/she satisfies any one of the following conditions:
(i) He/she has been in India during the previous year for a total period
of 182 days or more, or
(ii) He/she has been in India during the 4 years immediately preceding
the previous year for a total period of 365 days or more and has
been in India for at least 60 days in the previous year.
If an individual satisfies any one of the conditions mentioned above,
he/she is a resident. If both the above conditions are not satisfied, the
individual is a non-resident.
Therefore, the residential status of Miss Charlie, an American National,
for A.Y.2025-26 has to be determined on the basis of her stay in India
during the P.Y.2024-25 and in the preceding four previous years.
Her stay in India during the P.Y.2024-25 and in the preceding four
years are as under:
P.Y. 2024-25
01.04.2024 to 19.09.2024 - 172 days
27.03.2025 to 31.03.2025 - 5 days
Total 177 days
Four preceding previous years
P.Y. 2023-24 [1.4.2023 to 31.3.2024] - 16 days
P.Y. 2022-23 [1.4.2022 to 31.3.2023] - Nil
P.Y. 2021-22 [1.4.2021 to 31.3.2022] - Nil
P.Y. 2020-21 [1.4.2020 to 31.3.2021] - Nil
Total 16 days
The total stay of the assessee during the previous year in India was less
than 182 days and during the four years preceding this year was for 16
days. Therefore, due to non-fulfillment of any of the two conditions for a
resident, she would be treated as non-resident for the A.Y.2025-26.
9.43
AND OPTIMISATION
Computation of total income of Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2025-26
` `
Particulars
Income from house property
Show room located in Mumbai remained on
rent from 01.05.2024 to 31.03.2025@ 2,75,000
` 25,000/- p.m.
Gross Annual Value [` 25,000 x 11] (See Note
1 below)
Less: Municipal taxes Nil
Net Annual Value (NAV) 2,75,000
Less: Deduction under section 24
30% of NAV 82,500
Interest on loan 97,500 1,80,000 95,000
Income from other sources
Cash gifts received from non-relatives is
chargeable to tax as per section 56(2)(x), if the
aggregate value of such gifts exceeds ` 50,000.
- ` 50,000 received from parents of Nil
husband would be exempt, since parents
of husband fall within the definition of
‘relative’ and gifts from a relative are not
chargeable to tax.
- ` 11,000 received from married sister of Nil
husband is exempt, since sister-in-law falls
within the definition of relative and gifts
from a relative are not chargeable to tax.
- Gift received from two friends of husband 1,72,000 1,72,000
` 1,51,000 and ` 21,000 aggregating to
` 1,72,000 is taxable under section
56(2)(x) since the aggregate of ` 1,72,000
exceeds ` 50,000. (See Note 2 below)
Total income 2,67,000
Computation of tax liability by Miss Charlie for the A.Y. 2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
`
Particulars
Tax on total income of ` 2,67,000 850
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 34
Total tax liability 884
Total tax liability (rounded off) 880
Notes:
1. Actual rent received has been taken as the gross annual value in
the absence of other information (i.e. Municipal value, fair rental
value and standard rent) in the question.
2. If the aggregate value of taxable gifts received from non-relatives
exceed ` 50,000 during the year, the entire amount received (i.e.
the aggregate value of taxable gifts received) is taxable. Therefore,
the entire amount of ` 1,72,000 is taxable under section 56(2)(x).
3. Since Miss Charlie is a non-resident for the A.Y. 2025-26, rebate
under section 87A would not be available to her, even though her
total income does not exceed ` 5 lakhs.
(b) Residential status of Miss Charlie in case she is a person of Indian
origin and her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 18,00,000
If she is a person of Indian origin and her total income from Indian
sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 (` 18,00,000, in her case), the condition of
stay in India for a period exceeding 120 days during the previous year
and 365 days during the four immediately preceding previous years
would be applicable for being treated as a resident. Since her stay in
India exceeds 120 days in the P.Y.2024-25 but the period of her stay in
India during the four immediately preceding previous years is less
than 365 days (only 16 days), her residential status as per section 6(1)
would continue to be same i.e., non-resident in India.
Further, since she is not a citizen of India, the provisions of section
6(1A) deeming an individual to be a citizen of India would not get
attracted in her case, even though she is a person of Indian origin and
9.45
AND OPTIMISATION
her total income from Indian sources exceeds ` 15,00,000 and she is
not liable to pay tax in USA.
Therefore, her residential status would be non-resident in India for the
previous year 2024-25.
3. Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2025-26
under default tax regime
` ` `
Particulars
I Income from Salary
Basic Salary (` 7,500 x 12) 90,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) 75,000 15,000
II Income from house property
Gross Annual Value (GAV) 27,000
Less: Municipal taxes paid 2,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 25,000
Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of 7,500 17,500
` 25,000
III Income from profession
Net profit as per Income and 4,40,400
Expenditure account
Less: Items of income to be treated
separately
(i) Rent received (taxable under 27,000
the head “Income from house
property”)
(ii) Dividend from units of UTI 10,500
(taxable under the head “Income
from other sources”)
(iii) Winning from game show on 35,000
T.V. (net of TDS) – taxable
under the head “Income from
other sources”
(iv) Income tax refund 5,450 77,950
3,62,450
Less: Allowable expenditure
Depreciation on clinic equipments
on ` 5,00,000@15% 75,000
on ` 2,00,000@7.5% 15,000 90,000
(On equipments acquired during
the year in December 2024, she is
entitled to depreciation @50% of
normal depreciation, since the
same are put to use for less than
180 days during the year)
2,72,450
Add: Items of expenditure not
allowable while computing
business income
(i) Amount paid to scientific 1,50,000
research association approved
u/s 35 (not allowed under
default tax regime)
(i) Rent for her residential 30,000
accommodation included in
Income and Expenditure A/c
(ii) Municipal tax paid relating to
residential house at Surat
included in administrative
2,000 1,82,000 4,54,450
expenses
IV Income from other sources
(a) Interest on income-tax 450
refund
(b) Dividend from UTI (taxable in 10,500
the hands of unit holders)
(c) Winnings from TV game show
(` 35,000 + ` 15,000) 50,000 60,950
Gross Total Income 5,47,900
9.47
AND OPTIMISATION
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-
A:
(a) Section 80C [Not allowed under Nil
default tax regime]
(b) Section 80D [Not allowed under Nil
default tax regime]
(c) Section 80E [Not allowed under Nil
default tax regime]
Total income 5,47,900
Computation of total income of Dr. Niranjana for A.Y. 2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
` `
Particulars
Gross Total Income as per default tax 5,47,900
regime
Add: Standard deduction of Rs. 25,000, 25,000
being the excess amount allowed u/s
115BAC
Less: Items of expenditure allowable while
computing business income under normal
provisions of the Act
100% deduction is allowable in respect of 1,50,000
the amount paid to scientific research
association allowable under normal
provisions of the Act.
Gross Total Income as per normal 4,22,900
provisions of the Act
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A:
(a) Section 80C - Tuition fee paid to university
for full time education of her daughter 1,00,000
(b) Section 80D - Medical insurance
premium (fully allowed since she is a 28,000
senior citizen)
(c) Section 80E - Interest on loan taken for
higher education is deductible 55,000 1,83,000
Total income 2,39,900
Notes:
(i) The principal amount received towards income-tax refund will be
excluded from computation of total income. Interest received will be
taxed under the head “Income from other sources”.
(ii) Winnings from game show on T.V. should be grossed up for the
chargeability under the head “Income from other sources” (` 35,000 +
` 15,000). Thereafter, while computing tax liability, TDS of ` 15,000
should be deducted to arrive at the tax payable. Winnings from game
show are subject to tax @30% as per section 115BB.
(iii) Dr. Niranjana would not be eligible for deduction u/s 80GG under
normal provisions of the Act, as she owns a house in Surat, a place
where she is residing as well as carrying on her profession.
4. Computation of total income and tax payable by Ms. Purvi for
the A.Y. 2025-26 under default tax regime under section 115BAC
` `
Particulars
Income from house property (See Working Note 1) 57,820
Profit and gains of business or profession 9,20,200
(See Working Note 2)
Income from other sources (See Working Note 3) 33,924
Gross Total Income 10,11,944
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A [not allowable -
under default tax regime]
Total Income 10,11,944
Total Income (rounded off) 10,11,940
Tax on total income
Upto ` 3,00,000 Nil
` 3,00,001 - ` 7,00,000 @5% 20,000
` 7,00,001 - ` 10,00,000 @10% 30,000
9.49
AND OPTIMISATION
` 10,00,001 - ` 10,11,940 @ 15% 1,791 51,791
Add: Health and Education cess @ 4% 2,072
Total tax liability 53,863
Less: Advance tax paid 70,000
Less: Tax deducted at source on dividend income 1,052
from an Indian company u/s 194
Tax deducted at source on income from UTI u/s 194K 760 1,812
Tax Payable/ (Refundable) (17,949)
Tax Payable/ (Refundable) (rounded off) (17,950)
Computation of total income and tax payable
under normal provisions of the Act
` `
Particulars
Gross Total Income 10,11,944
[Income under the “Income from house property”
“Profits and gains from business or profession” and
“Income from other sources” would remain the same
even if Ms. Purvi opts out of the default tax regime
under section 115BAC]
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A (See Working 10,000
Note 4)
Total Income 10,01,944
Total Income (rounded off) 10,01,940
Tax on total income
Upto ` 2,50,000 Nil
` 2,50,001 – ` 5,00,000 @5% 12,500
` 5,00,000 - ` 10,00,000 @20% 1,00,000
` 10,00,000 – ` 10,01,940 @ 30% 582 1,13,082
Add: Health and Education cess @ 4% 4,523
Total tax liability 1,17,605
Less: Advance tax paid 70,000
Less: TDS u/s 194 on dividend 1,052
TDS u/s 194K on income from UTI 760 1,812
Tax Payable 45,793
Tax Payable (rounded off) 45,790
Since there is tax refundable under default tax regime under section 115BAC
and tax payable under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, it
would be beneficial for Ms. Purvi to pay tax under default tax regime under
section 115BAC.
Working Notes:
(1) Income from House Property
` `
Particulars
Gross Annual Value under section 23(1) 85,600
Less: Municipal taxes paid 3,000
Net Annual Value (NAV) 82,600
Less: Deduction u/s 24@30% of NAV 24,780 57,820
Note - Rent received has been taken as the Gross Annual Value in the
absence of other information relating to Municipal Value, Fair Rent
and Standard Rent.
(2) Income under the head “Profits & Gains of Business or
Profession”
` `
Particulars
Net profit as per Income and Expenditure account 9,28,224
Add: Expenses debited but not allowable
(i) Salary paid to computer specialist in cash 30,000
disallowed u/s 40A(3), since such cash
payment exceeds ` 10,000
(ii) Amount paid for purchase of car is not 80,000
allowable under section 37(1) since it is a
capital expenditure
9.51
AND OPTIMISATION
(ii) Municipal taxes paid in respect of 3,000 1,13,000
residential flat let out
10,41,224
Add: Value of benefit received from clients
during the course of profession [taxable as 10,500
business income under section 28(iv)]
10,51,724
Less: Income credited but not taxable under
this head:
(i) Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian 10,524
company (taxable under the head “Income
from other sources")
(ii) Income from UTI (taxable under the head 7,600
“Income from other sources")
(iii) Honorarium for valuation of answer papers 15,800
(iv) Rent received from letting out of 85,600 1,19,524
residential flat
9,32,200
Less: Depreciation on motor car @15% (See
Note (i) below) 12,000
9,20,200
Notes :
(i) It has been assumed that the motor car was put to use for more
than 180 days during the previous year and hence, full
depreciation @ 15% has been provided for under section
32(1)(ii).
Note: Alternatively, the question can be solved by assuming that
motor car has been put to use for less than 180 days and
accordingly, only 50% of depreciation would be allowable as per
the second proviso below section 32(1)(ii).
(ii) Incentive to articled assistants for passing CA Intermediate
examination in their first attempt is deductible under section
37(1).
(iii) Repairs and maintenance paid in advance for the period 1.4.2025
to 30.9.2025 i.e. for 6 months amounting to ` 1,000 is allowable
since Ms. Purvi is following the cash system of accounting.
(iv) ` 32,000 expended on foreign tour is allowable as deduction
assuming that it was incurred in connection with her
professional work. Since it has already been debited to income
and expenditure account, no further adjustment is required.
(3) Income from other sources
`
Particulars
Dividend on shares of X Ltd., an Indian company (taxable 10,524
in the hands of shareholders)
Income from UTI (taxable in the hands of unit holders) 7,600
Honorarium for valuation of answer papers 15,800
33,924
(4) Deduction under Chapter VI-A :
`
Particulars
Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC) 10,000
Deduction under section 80D (See Notes (i) & (ii) below) Nil
Total deduction under Chapter VI-A 10,000
Notes:
(i) Premium paid to insure the health of brother is not eligible for
deduction under section 80D, even though he is a dependent,
since brother is not included in the definition of “family” under
section 80D.
(ii) Premium paid to insure the health of major son is not eligible for
deduction, even though he is a dependent, since payment is
made in cash.
9.53
AND OPTIMISATION
5. Computation of total income of Mr. Y for the A.Y. 2025-26
`
Particulars
Profits and gains of business or profession (See Working 11,21,500
Note 1 below)
Income from other sources (See Working Note 2 below) 54,500
Gross Total Income 11,76,000
Less: Deduction under section 80C (Investment in NSC) 15,000
Total Income 11,61,000
Working Notes:
1. Computation of profits and gains of business or profession
` `
Particulars
Net profit as per profit and loss account 11,20,000
Add: Expenses debited to profit and loss
account but not allowable as
deduction
Salary paid to brother disallowed to the 2,500
extent considered unreasonable [Section
40A(2)]
Motor car expenses attributable to personal 19,500
use not allowable (` 78,000 × ¼)
Depreciation debited in the books of 55,000
account
Drawings (not allowable since it is 10,000
personal in nature) [See Note (iii)]
Investment in NSC [See Note (iii)] 15,000 1,02,000
12,22,000
Add: Under statement of closing stock 12,000
12,34,000
Less: Under statement of opening stock 8,000
Less: Contribution to a University approved
and notified u/s 35(1)(ii) is eligible for
100% deduction. Since whole of the
actual contribution (100%) has been
debited to profit and loss account, no
-
further adjustment is required.
12,26,000
Less: Incomes credited to profit and loss
account but not taxable as business
income
Income from UTI [taxable under the head 22,000
“Income from other sources”]
Interest on debentures (taxable under 17,500
the head “Income from other sources”)
Winnings from horse races (taxable
under the head “Income from other 15,000 54,500
sources”)
11,71,500
Less: Depreciation allowable under the
Income-tax Rules, 1962 50,000
11,21,500
Notes:
(i) Advertisement expenses of revenue nature, namely, gift of dry
fruits to important customers, is incurred wholly and exclusively
for business purposes. Hence, the same is allowable as
deduction under section 37.
(ii) Disallowance under section 40A(3) is not attracted in respect of
cash payment exceeding ` 10,000 to A & Co., a goods transport
operator, since, in case of payment made for plying, hiring or
leasing goods carriages, an increased limit of ` 35,000 is
applicable (i.e. payment of upto ` 35,000 can be made in cash
without attracting disallowance under section 40A(3))
(iii) Since drawings and investment in NSC have been given effect to
in the profit and loss account, the same have to be added back
to arrive at the business income.
9.55
AND OPTIMISATION
(iv) In point no. 9 of the question, it has been given that
depreciation as per Income-tax Rules, 1962 is ` 50,000. It has
been assumed that, in the said figure of ` 50,000, only the
proportional depreciation (i.e., 75% for business purposes) has
been included in respect of motor car.
2. Computation of “Income from Other Sources”
`
Particulars
Dividend from UTI 22,000
Interest on debentures 17,500
Winnings from races 15,000
54,500
6. Computation of total income of Balamurugan
for the year ended 31.03.2025
` `
Particulars
Salaries 2,70,000
Less: Loss from house property (Cannot be set off - 2,70,000
against income under any other head)
Profits and gains of business or profession
Speculation business income 1,00,000
Less: Business loss of ` 1,35,000 set-off to the (1,00,000)
extent of ` 1,00,000
Nil
Balance current year business loss of ` 35,000 to
be set-off against long-term capital gain
Capital Gains
Long term capital gain 70,000
Less: Balance current year business loss set-off (35,000)
Long term capital gain after set off of business loss 35,000
Income from other sources
Lottery winnings (Gross) 5,00,000
Total Income 8,05,000
Computation of tax liability for A.Y.2025-26
`
Particulars
On total income of ` 2,70,000 (excluding lottery winning and Nil
LTCG)
On LTCG of ` 5,000 @20% (balance unexhausted basic 1,000
exemption limit of ` 30,000 can be adjusted against LTCG
taxable u/s 112)
On lottery winnings of ` 5,00,000 @ 30% 1,50,000
1,51,000
Add: Health and Education cess @ 4% 6,040
Total tax liability 1,57,040
The assessee need not pay advance tax since the total income (excluding
lottery income) liable to tax is below the basic exemption limit. Further, in
respect of lottery income, tax would have been deducted at source @ 30%
under section 194B. Since the remaining tax liability of ` 6,040 (` 1,57,040 –
` 1,50,000) is less than ` 10,000, advance tax liability is not attracted.
Note - The first proviso to section 234C(1) provides that since it is not
possible for the assessee to estimate his income from lotteries, the entire
amount of tax payable (after considering TDS) on such income should be
paid in the remaining instalments of advance tax which are due. Where no
such instalment is due, the entire tax should be paid by 31st March, 2025.
The first proviso to section 234C(1) would be attracted only in case of non-
deduction or short-deduction of tax at source under section 194B. In this
case, it has been assumed that tax deductible at source under section 194B
has been fully deducted from lottery income. Since the remaining tax
liability of ` 1,040 (` 1,57,040 – ` 1,50,000) is less than ` 10,000, advance tax
liability is not attracted.
7. Computation of total income of Mr. Rajiv for the A.Y.2025-26
` ` `
Particulars
Income from house property
Self-occupied
Annual value Nil
Less: Deduction under section 24(b)
9.57
AND OPTIMISATION
Interest on housing loan
50% of ` 88,000 = 44,000 but limited to 30,000
Loss from self-occupied property (30,000)
Let out property
Annual value (Rent receivable has been
taken as the annual value in the absence 60,000
of other information)
Less: Deductions u/s 24
30% of Net Annual Value 18,000
Interest on housing loan
(50% of ` 88,000) 44,000 62,000 (2,000)
Loss from house property (32,000)
Profits and gains of business or
profession
Fees from professional services 59,38,000
Less: Expenses allowable as deduction
Staff salary, bonus and stipend 21,50,000
Other administrative expenses 11,48,000
Office rent 30,000
Motor car maintenance (10,000 x 4/5) 8,000
Car loan interest – not allowable (since
the same has not been paid and the
assessee follows cash system of Nil 33,36,000
accounting)
Less: Depreciation 26,02,000
Motor car ` 4,25,000 x 7.5% x 4/5 25,500
Books being annual publications@40% 8,000
Furniture and fittings@10% of ` 60,000 6,000
Plant and machinery@15% of ` 80,000 12,000
Computer@40% of ` 50,000 20,000
Computer (New) ` 30,000 @ 40% x 50% 6,000 77,500 25,24,500
Gross Total income 24,92,500
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Deduction under section 80C
Housing loan principal repayment 1,00,000
PPF subscription 20,000
Life insurance premium 24,000
Total amount of ` 1,44,000 is allowed as 1,44,000
deduction since it is within the limit of
` 1,50,000
Deduction under section 80D
Medical insurance premium paid 18,000 1,62,000
Total income 23,30,500
8. Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant under default
tax regime under section 115BAC for the A.Y. 2025-26
` `
Particulars
Salary Income
Salary including dearness allowance 4,35,000
Bonus 15,000
Value of perquisites:
(i) Salary of servant 12,000
(ii) Free gas, electricity and water 11,000 23,000
4,73,000
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 75,000
3,98,000
Income from house property
Gross Annual Value (GAV) (Rent receivable is taken as 42,000
GAV in the absence of other information) (` 3,500 × 12)
Less: Municipal taxes paid 4,300
Net Annual Value (NAV) 37,700
9.59
AND OPTIMISATION
Less: Deductions under section 24
(i) 30% of NAV ` 11,310
(ii) Interest on loan from LIC @15%
of ` 1,60,000 [See Note 2] ` 24,000 35,310 2,390
Income from speculative business
Income from share speculation business 2,700
Less: Loss of ` 4,200 from cotton speculation business 2,700 Nil
set-off to the extent of ` 2,700
Balance loss of ` 1,500 from cotton speculation
business has to be carried forward to the next year as
it cannot be set off against any other head of income.
Income from Other Sources
(i) Income on account of interest earned from advancing 3,800
money gifted to his minor son is includible in the
hands of Siddhant as per section 64(1A) [Exemption
under section 10(32) would not be available]
(ii) Interest income earned from advancing money
gifted to wife has to be clubbed with the income
of the assessee as per section 64(1) 5,700
(iii) Gift received from four friends (taxable under
section 56(2)(x) as the aggregate amount received
during the year exceeds ` 50,000) 1,20,000 1,29,500
Gross Total Income 5,29,890
Deduction under section 80C [No deduction under
Chapter VI-A would be allowed as per section Nil
115BAC(2)]
Total Income 5,29,890
`
Particulars
Tax on total income [5% of ` 2,29,890 (` 5,29,890 - 11,495
` 3,00,000]
Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not exceed
` 7,00,000 11,495
Tax liability Nil
Computation of total income and tax liability of Siddhant
for the A.Y. 2025-26 under normal provisions of the Act
` `
Particulars
Gross total income (as per default scheme) 5,29,890
Add: Standard Deduction [Rs. 25,000 being excess 25,000
amount allowed under section 1 15BAC]
Less: Exemption u/s 10(32) in respect of interest
income of minor son included in the hands of 1,500
Siddhant
Gross total income (under the normal 5,53,390
provisions of the Act)
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Under section 80C [Contribution to PPF] 50,000
Total Income 5,03,390
`
Particulars
Tax on total income [5% of ` 2,50,000 + 20% of ` 3,390] 13,178
Add: HEC @4% 527
Tax liability 13,705
Tax liability (Rounded off) 13,710
Since his total income as per the normal provisions of the Act exceeds
` 5,00,000, he would not be eligible for rebate under section 87A.
Since Mr. Siddhant is not liable to pay any tax under default tax regime
under section 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to not to exercise the
option of shift out of the default tax regime for A.Y.2025-26.
Notes:
(1) It is assumed that the entire loan of ` 1,60,000 is outstanding as on
31.3.2025;
(2) Since Siddhant’s own flat in a co-operative housing society, which he
has rented out to a nationalized bank, is also in Delhi, he is not
eligible for deduction under section 80GG in respect of rent paid by
him for his accommodation in Delhi, since one of the conditions to be
satisfied for claiming deduction under section 80GG is that the
assessee should not own any residential accommodation in the same
place.
9.61
AND OPTIMISATION
9. Computation of Total Income of Mr. Ramdin for the A.Y.2025-26
under normal provisions of the Act
` `
Particulars
Income from Salaries
Basic Salary (` 15,000 x 12) 1,80,000
Dearness Allowance (` 12,000 x12) 1,44,000
Commission on Turnover (0.5% of ` 50 lakhs) 25,000
Bonus 50,000
Gratuity (See Note 1) 30,000
Employer’s contribution to recognized provident fund
Actual contribution [20% of ` 1,80,000] 36,000
Less: Exempt (See Note 2) 33,240 2,760
Interest credited in recognized provident fund 15,000
account @15% p.a.
Less: Exempt upto 9.5% p.a. 9,500 5,500
Gift of gold ring worth ` 10,000 on 25th wedding
anniversary by employer (See Note 3) 10,000
Perquisite value of music system given for
personal use (being 10% of actual cost) i.e. 10% 8,500
of ` 85,000
4,55,760
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 50,000
4,05,760
Profits and Gains of Business or Profession
Lease of 2 light goods vehicles on contract basis
against fixed charges of ` 6,500 p.m. In this case, 1,80,000
presumptive tax provisions of section 44AE will
apply i.e. ` 7,500 p.m. for each of the two light
goods vehicle (` 7,500 x 2 x 12). He cannot claim
lower profits and gains since he has not
maintained books of account.
Income from Other Sources
Interest on bank FDRs 5,860
Interest on debentures (` 6786 x 100/90) 7,540 13,400
Gross total Income 5,99,160
Less: Deductions under Chapter VI-A
Section 80C
Premium on life insurance policy 15,370
Investment in NSC 30,000
FDR of SBI for 5 years 50,000
Employee’s contribution to recognized provident 30,000 1,25,370
fund
Section 80D – Mediclaim Insurance 22,500
Section 80G (See Note 4) 10,600
Total Income 4,40,690
Tax on total income
Income-tax [5% of ` 1,90,690 (i.e., ` 4,40,690 – 9,535
` 2,50,000)
Less: Rebate u/s 87A, since total income does not
exceed ` 5,00,000 9,535
Tax liability Nil
Less: Tax deducted at source (` 7,540 – ` 6,786) 754
Net tax refundable 754
Tax refundable (rounded off) 750
Notes:
1. Gratuity received during service is fully taxable.
2. Employer’s contribution in the recognized provident fund is exempt
up to 12% of the salary i.e. 12% of (Basic Salary + DA for retirement
benefits + Commission based on turnover)
= 12% of (` 1,80,000+ (50% of ` 1,44,000)+ ` 25,000)
= 12% of 2,77,000 = ` 33,240
9.63
AND OPTIMISATION
3. An alternate view possible is that only the sum in excess of ` 5,000 is
taxable in view of the language of Circular No.15/2001 dated
12.12.2001 that such gifts upto ` 5,000 in the aggregate per annum
would be exempt, beyond which it would be taxed as a perquisite. As
per this view, the value of perquisite would be ` 5,000. In such a case
the Income from Salaries would be ` 4,00,760.
4. Deduction under section 80G is computed as under:
`
Particulars
Donation to PM National Relief Fund (100%) 5,100
Donation to institution approved under section 80G (50%
of ` 11,000) (amount contributed ` 11,000 or 10% of
Adjusted Total Income i.e. ` 45,129, whichever is lower) 5,500
Total deduction 10,600
Adjusted Total Income = Gross Total Income − Deductions under
section 80C and 80D = ` 5,99,160 − ` 1,47,870 = ` 4,51,290.
10. Computation of total income of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26
` `
Particulars
Income from Salaries
Basic salary (` 25,000 x 9 months) 2,25,000
House rent allowance:
Actual amount received (` 6,000 x 9 months) 54,000
Less : Exemption under section 10(13A)(Note 1) 36,000 18,000
Gratuity:
Actual amount received 3,50,000
Less: Exemption under section 10(10)(ii) (Note 2) 3,50,000 -
Leave encashment:
Actual amount received 3,15,000
Less : Exemption under section 10(10AA) (Note 3) 2,45,000 70,000
Gross Salary 3,13,000
Less: Standard deduction under section 16(ia) 50,000
2,63,000
Profits and gains of business or profession
Business loss of ` 80,000 to be carried forward as
the same cannot be set off against salary income Nil
Gross Total income 2,63,000
Less : Deduction under section 80C
Deposit in Public Provident Fund 1,00,000
Total income 1,63,000
Tax on total income (Nil, since it is lower than the Nil
basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000)
Notes:
(1) As per section 10(13A), house rent allowance will be exempt to the
extent of least of the following three amounts:
`
(i) HRA actually received (` 6,000 x 9) 54,000
(ii) Rent paid in excess of 10% of salary (` 6,500 – 36,000
` 2,500) x 9 months
(iii) 50% of salary 1,12,500
(2) Gratuity of ` 3,50,000 is exempt under section 10(10)(ii), being the
minimum of the following amounts:
`
(i) Actual amount received 3,50,000
(ii) Half month salary for each year of completed 3,75,000
service [(` 25,000 x 15/26) x 26 years]
(iii) Statutory limit 20,00,000
(3) Leave encashment is exempt upto the least of the following:
`
(i) Actual amount received 3,15,000
(ii) 10 months average salary (` 24,500 x 10) 2,45,000
(iii) Cash equivalent of unavailed leave calculated on the
basis of maximum 30 days for every year of actual
service rendered to the employer from whose
service he retired (See Note 4 below) 3,18,500
(iv) Statutory limit 25,00,000
9.65
AND OPTIMISATION
(4) Since the leave entitlement of Mr. X as per his employer’s rules is 30
days credit for each year of service and he had accumulated 15 days
per annum during the period of his service, he would have
availed/taken the balance 15 days leave every year.
Leave entitlement of Mr. X on the
basis of 30 days for every year of
actual service rendered by him to = 30 days/year x 26 = 780 days
the employer
Less: Leave taken /availed by Mr. X
during the period of his service = 15 days/year x 26 = 390 days
Earned leave to the credit of Mr. X 390 days
at the time of his retirement
Cash equivalent of earned leave =390 × ` 24,500/30 = ` 3,18,500
to the credit of Mr. X at the time
of his retirement
11. Computation of total income of Mrs. Rosy and Mrs. Mary for the A.Y.2025-26
S. Particulars Mrs. Mrs.
No. Rosy Mary
(Non- (ROR)
resident)
` `
(I) Salaries
Pension recd from State Govt. ` 60,000
Less: Standard deduction u/s 16(ia) ` 50,000 - 10,000
Pension received from Canadian - -
Government is not taxable in the case of a
non-resident since it is earned and
received outside India
- 10,000
(II) Income from house property
Rent received from house property at 60,000 30,000
Mumbai (assumed to be the annual value in
the absence of other information i.e.
municipal value, fair rent and standard rent)
Less: Deduction u/s 24(a)@30% 18,000 9,000
42,000 21,000
(III) Capital gains
Long-term capital gain on sale of land at 1,00,000 1,00,000
Mumbai
Short term capital gain on sale of shares of
Indian listed companies in respect of which 20,000 2,50,000
STT was paid
1,20,000 3,50,000
(A) Gross Total Income [(I)+(II)+(III)] 1,62,000 3,81,000
Less: Deductions under Chapter VIA
1. Deduction u/s 80C
1. LIC Premium paid - 10,000
2. Premium paid to Canadian Life 40,000 -
Insurance Corporation
3. Deposit in PPF - 20,000
40,000 30,000
2. Deduction u/s 80D – Mediclaim premium paid - 25,000
40,000 55,000
(B) Total deduction under Chapter VI-A is
restricted to income other than capital
gains taxable under sections 111A & 112 40,000 31,000
(C) Total income (A-B) 1,22,000 3,50,000
Tax liability of Mrs. Rosy for A.Y.2025-26
Tax on long-term capital gains @20% of 20,000
` 1,00,000
Tax on short-term capital gains @15% of 3,000
` 20,000
Tax on balance income of ` 2,000 Nil
23,000
Tax liability of Mrs. Mary for A.Y.2025-26
Tax on STCG @15% of ` 1,00,000 [i.e., 15,000
` 2,50,000 less ` 1,50,000, being the
unexhausted basic exemption limit as per
9.67
AND OPTIMISATION
proviso to section 111A] [See Notes 3 & 4
below]
Less: Rebate u/s 87A would be lower of 12,500
` 12,500 or tax liability, since total income
does not exceed ` 5,00,000
2,500
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 920 100
Total tax liability 23,920 2,600
Notes:
(1) Long-term capital gains on sale of land on 15.5.2024, is chargeable to
tax@20% as per section 112.
(2) Short-term capital gains on transfer of equity shares on 23.4.2024 in
respect of which securities transaction tax is paid is subject to
tax@15% as per section 111A.
(3) In case of resident individuals, if the basic exemption limit is not fully
exhausted against other income, then, the long-term capital gains u/s
112/short-term capital gains u/s 111A will be reduced by the
unexhausted basic exemption limit and only the balance will be taxed
at 20%/15%, respectively. However, this benefit is not available to
non-residents. Therefore, while Mrs. Mary can adjust unexhausted
basic exemption limit against long-term capital gains taxable under
section 112 and short-term capital gains taxable under section 111A,
Mrs. Rosy cannot do so.
(4) Since long-term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 20% and short-
term capital gains is taxable at the rate of 15%, it is more beneficial for
Mrs. Mary to first exhaust her basic exemption limit of ` 2,50,000
against long-term capital gains of ` 100,000 and the balance limit of
` 1,50,000 (i.e., ` 2,50,000 – ` 1,50,000) against short-term capital
gains.
(5) Rebate under section 87A would not be available to Mrs. Rosy even
though her total income does not exceed ` 5,00,000, since she is non-
resident for the A.Y. 2025-26.
12. Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26
(under default tax regime under section 115BAC)
` `
Particulars
Profits and gains of business or profession
Profit from unit in SEZ 40,00,000
Profit from operation of warehousing facility 1,05,00,000
Less: Depreciation under section 32
On building @10% of ` 65 lakhs4 (normal
depreciation under section 32 is allowable) 6,50,000 98,50,000
Total Income 1,38,50,000
Computation of tax liability as per section
115BAC
Tax on ` 1,38,50,000 38,45,000
Add: Surcharge@15% 5,76,750
44,21,750
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 1,76,870
Total tax liability 45,98,620
Notes:
(1) Deductions u/s 10AA and 35AD are not allowable as per section
115BAC(2). However, normal depreciation u/s 32 is allowable.
(2) Mr. X is not liable to alternate minimum tax u/s 115JC under default
tax regime under section 115BAC.
Computation of total income and tax liability of Mr. X for A.Y.2025-26
(under the regular provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961)
` `
Particulars
Profits and gains of business or profession
Profit from unit in SEZ 40,00,000
Less: Deduction u/s 10AA [See Note (1) below] 16,00,000
Business income of SEZ unit chargeable to tax 24,00,000
4 Assuming the capital expenditure of ` 65 lakhs is incurred entirely on buildings
9.69
AND OPTIMISATION
Profit from operation of warehousing facility 1,05,00,000
Less: Deduction u/s 35AD [See Note (2) below] 65,00,000
Business income of warehousing facility 40,00,000
chargeable to tax
Total Income 64,00,000
Computation of tax liability (under the normal/
regular provisions)
Tax on ` 64,00,000 17,32,500
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 69,300
Total tax liability 18,01,800
Computation of adjusted total income of Mr. X
for levy of Alternate Minimum Tax
` `
Particulars
Total Income (computed above as per 64,00,000
regular provisions of income tax)
Add: Deduction under section 10AA 16,00,000
80,00,000
Add: Deduction under section 35AD 65,00,000
Less: Depreciation under section 32
On building @10% of `65 lakhs5 6,50,000 58,50,000
Adjusted Total Income 1,38,50,000
Alternate Minimum Tax@18.5% 25,62,250
Add: Surcharge@15% (since adjusted total 3,84,338
income > ` 1 crore)
29,46,588
Add: Health and Education cess@4% 1,17,863
30,64,451
Tax liability u/s 115JC (rounded off) 30,64,450
5 Assuming the capital expenditure of `65 lakhs is incurred entirely on buildings
Since the regular income-tax payable is less than the alternate minimum tax
payable, the adjusted total income shall be deemed to be the total income
and tax is leviable @18.5% thereof plus surcharge@15% and cess@4%.
Therefore, tax liability as per section 115JC is ` 30,64,450.
Since the tax liability of Mr. X under section 115JC is lower than the tax
liability as computed u/s 115BAC, it would be beneficial for him to opt out
of the default tax regime under section 115BAC for A.Y. 2025-26.
Moreover, benefit of alternate minimum tax credit is also available to the
extent of tax paid in excess over regular tax.
AMT Credit to be carried forward under section 115JEE
`
Tax liability under section 115JC 30,64,450
Less: Tax liability under the regular provisions of the 18,01,800
Income-tax Act, 1961
12,62,650
Notes:
(1) Deduction under section 10AA in respect of Unit in SEZ =
Export turnover of the Unit in SEZ
Profit of the Unit in SEZ× x 50%
Total turnover of the Unit in SEZ
80,00,000
40,00,000× x 50% = ` 16,00,000
1,00,00,000
(2) Deduction@100% of the capital expenditure is available under section
35AD for A.Y.2025-26 in respect of specified business of setting up
and operating a warehousing facility for storage of agricultural
produce which commences operation on or after 01.04.2009.
Further, the expenditure incurred, wholly and exclusively, for the
purposes of such specified business, shall be allowed as deduction
during the previous year in which he commences operations of his
specified business if the expenditure is incurred prior to the
commencement of its operations and the amount is capitalized in the
books of account of the assessee on the date of commencement of its
operations.
9.71
AND OPTIMISATION
Deduction under section 35AD would, however, not be available on
expenditure incurred on acquisition of land.
In this case, since the capital expenditure of ` 65 lakhs (i.e., ` 75 lakhs
– ` 10 lakhs, being expenditure on acquisition of land) has been
incurred in the F.Y.2023-24 and capitalized in the books of account on
1.4.2024, being the date when the warehouse became operational,
` 65,00,000, being 100% of ` 65 lakhs would qualify for deduction
under section 35AD.
